# Meeting setup

* Date: 1.3.2010
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Internet
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat

# Agenda

Cf. one of the following, depending on context:
* the upper bar of the SEE window (provided you use the JSPWiki syntax mode)
* the TOC in Forrest-rendered output, like HTML and PDF

# Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 10:02.

Present:
**Børre, Ciprian, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi, Trond**

Absent: **Maja**

Agenda accepted as is.

# Updated task status since last meeting

## Børre
* contact Ávvir about renewed corpus cooperation
* contact certain `sma` writers
    - done
* Jabber server and group chats: user name issues + lost chat history
    - not done
* implement language switch for static divvun site
    - not done
* improve XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Draw document
    - not done
* `gt/Makefile` remake
    - not
* get translations of thank-you letter
    - The South Sami is in
* make the new SL Server services functional:
    - group calendars
        - not done
* set up corpus mirroring on the XServe again
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
* other:
    - upgraded victorio
    - upgraded subversion from 1.4 to 1.6 on victorio
    - made a private repository for fitswe

## Ciprian
* infrastructure
    - make a schema/dtd description of the lexC-file (experiment with
  Komi and Romanian)
    - transform sme-lexC files into XML format
    - restructure and clean the script catalogue as suggested in the newsgroup
        - todo
* GT web:
    - colouring output of the disambiguation
    - add a tree visualizer for the dependency trees
    - add input help for special characters on the tool sites
    - automatise the web statistics
    - filter (English, German, etc.) input using language detection tools
    - put a note on the sites that these are NOT MT tools
    - input help for generating wordforms (dropdown menus).
        - todo
* Bodø Oahpa:
    - test the DB feeding of word forms from files (i.e., statically - vs. by
   generating paradigms)
        - done
    - finish the MorfaC implementation
        - only one bug left
    - finish the setup of the bdoahpa versions on victorio
        - todo, however Michael Riessler changed again the language pairs needed last
    week
* Sandbox Oahpa:
    - Numra for Skolt Sámi and Finnish
    - finish the db installation for sb_oahpa
        - todo
* Running Oahpa:
    - add an Oahpa clock and date excercise (cf. Numra)
    - email notification when the server goes down
* dictionaries, generally:
    - synchronize the source language entries from a specific dictionary with the
   entries in the morphology component (now especially for sma):
   that means nothing then put the entries from dict that are NOT analyzed
   into the lexC files
    - the StarDict on Windows: try the HTML-plugin (that means that users can use
   StarDict 3.2)
    - try to reduce the dict-size on mac: experiment with xPointer, etc.
        - todo
* Fkv:Nob - Nob:Fkv:
    - compile the dictionaries for both directions and in both formats (internal
   deadline: 20.01.2010)
    - try to implement a web version of the dictionaries (not that relevant anymore
   thank to Sjur and Trond's work to synchronize and vizualize gt_dicts using
   existing XML stylesheets)
        - internal deadlines are not relevant anymore since Trond communicated a date
    mid of March
* KomEngFin:
    - test the automatic sorting by Komi alphabet in xsl (as discussed
   with **Trond**)
        - todo
* SmeNob:
    - incorporate the passives into the last version of the sme:nob
* SmaNobSwe:
    - extend the smanobswe dictionary: waiting for data (incorporate the data from
   Maja-Lisa)
        - todo
* SjdRus:
    - continue the work at the Kildin-Russian dictionary, next internal deadline is
   the Bodø workshop in March 2010
        - todo (right after workshop)
* Corpus:
    - check the processing of new corpus documents (error logging during
   conversion, conversion quality, documentation, etc.)
        - **Sjur** already started this action together with **Saara** (thank you very
    much to both of you)
* Lexicon workshop
    - evaluate the participants' materials
    - write feedback emails to each of participant with an individual electronic
   dictionary
        - ongoing: together with the preparation for teaching materials for Bodø
    - contact Kimberly Mäkäräinen and ask whether she might be willing to share
   data with us
        - todo
* Linearisation workshop
    - make slides for the GfDS conference in Berlin
        - done, and presented them also

## Maja
* add missing sma verbs
    - ongoing - se next item
* check verb Umlaut for several verbs
    - ongoing and will start to work with the derivations in sma.file
* Prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
    - some done
* more work on `sma` adjectives
* contact authors of `sma` aticles in 9-10 eds. of the yearbook
  *Åarjel-saemieh*
    - write a letter to Saemien sïjte
* look at incoming loanwords and add them
    - ongoing
* make a goldstandard doc. av SÄPO-dok - korrektur
    - nothing this week
* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts
    - contact Aleksandersen Turi in Sámediggi
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - other- corrected ref.pronoun and negation

## Sjur
* write letter to Fylkesmannen i Nordland
    - not done, I'm still very much in doubt about whether to go there - motivation
   is extremely low
* check verb Umlaut for several verbs
    - done
* gold standard testing for `sma`
    - waiting for Polderland tools - now there is actual contact with the PL
   take-overs
* difftest for fst and PL speller
* @Barents: plan a meeting/seminar with potential cooperation partners
* @Barents: plan for The Real Thing
* @TTS: continue public tender process
* make **Leif Åge** send out CD's to distribution points
* start Nordplus Sprog project
* Write a formal letter to *Davvi girji* about electronic dictionaries
* make XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
* name db/risten.no
    - some maintenance work on risten.no
    - Ávvir has had a list of critical publications towards SD and risten.no,
   mainly on content, but also some functionality
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
* Sámi languages as part of *Norsk språkbank*
    - not relevant at the moment, the whole organisation has been redefined (to the
   better)
* find and contact the correct person in SD, to get the manuscript for all Sámi
  teaching material now being given out to the schools
* write new build commands for make
* when the new build infrastructure works as it should, delete the old ones
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Thomas
* sort out words that do not follow usual Umlaut rules to specific lexica
    - worked
* change rules for vhn, vhl and similar in julev sámi hyphen-file
    - not done
* add missing sma verbs
    - done
* prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
    - nothing this week
* Digitalize south saami books
    - nothing this week
* add compound tags for `sma`
    - nothing this week
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - nothing this week

## Tomi
* test that the new analysers behave as the old one (=give exactly the same res)
    - done some testing, seems to work ok
* put together the TTS preprocessing transducers and scripts
    - looked into this
* write new build commands
    - not done
* when the new build infrastructure works as it should, delete the old ones
    - not done
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
    - not done
* fix double hyphen bugs
    - not done
* fix PL `smj` hyphenator bug
    - not done
* fix PL conversion bugs
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond
* check verb Umlaut for several verbs
    - Not followed up the initial discussion
* fkv:nob and nob:fkv scheduled for 18.3. release:
    - content and webpage update
        - Worked substantially on this one:
    Extensive POS update (doublets to be fixed), webpage
    not written.
* Northern areas
    - Progress, albeit slow
* MT/Terminology
    - Done paperwork
* Bodø Oahpa
    - will continue writing as soon as this meeting is over...
* Finding a volunteer to translate the sme Leksa lexicon to Swedish
    - In dialogue with him.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).

# Oahpa!

There's a bug in the official Oahpa!, needs to be fixed ASAP. Bodø Oahpa! needs
to be installed this week according with the last decisions upon the language pairs.

Meeting memos can be found at
[http://giellatekno.uit.no/ped/index.html#Meeting+memos]

**TODO**
* Register oahpa.no (**Trond**)
* Generate fin/xml/{nouns|verbs|adjectives}.xml, and implement the new Leksa
  dropdown menu (**Ciprian**).
* From the start: sjd_oahpa Leksa in deu and eng as well
* clock and date for Numra (**Trond, Ciprian**).
* Numra for Skolt Sámi (**Trond, Ciprian**)
* implement the Bodø-Oahpa (**Ciprian, Trond, Lene**)
* email notification when the server goes down (**Ciprian**)
* Finding a volunteer to translate the sme Leksa lexicon to Swedish (**Trond**)

# Corpus gathering

**TODO:**
* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts (**Maja**)
    - get `sma` articles in Š-bláđđi
    - the Gun Utsi book is almost there - one contract missing (**Maja**)
* write formal letter to Davvi Girji (**Sjur**)
* send a copy of the signed contracts back to the authors, translators and
  publishers, accompanied by the thank-you letter
* find and contact the correct person in SD, to get the manuscript for all Sámi
  teaching material now being given out to the schools (**Sjur**)
* get the `sma` yearbooks from *Saemien sïjhte* (**Maja**)
* contact certain `sma` writers (**Børre**)
* contact Ávvir about renewed corpus cooperation (**Børre**)

# Promoting Divvun

**TODO:**
* make leaflet to inform about the project (**Børre**)
    - add InDesign text (**Sjur**)
    - make XSL script to transform Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
   (**Børre, Sjur**)
* distribute CD version through the library bus, the language centres and common
  sami centres in all of Sápmi. Gaaltije in Östersund for example.
  (**Leif Åge, Sjur**)
    - make him send out CD's accordingly (**Sjur**)
* update online download log statistics page (**Børre**)

# Future plans, directions and ideas

See a separate document in `plan/strat/5year.jspwiki`.

## Northern areas project

**TODO:**
* Attend a beginners' course in Russian (priority: the alphabet!) near you..
* plan a meeting/seminar with potential cooperation partners (**Trond, Sjur**)
* plan for The Real Thing (**Trond, Sjur**)

# Infrastructure

## Makefile + tag simplification

**TODO:**
1. test that the output from the new transducers is identical to the old one
  (**Tomi**)
1. write new build commands (**Sjur, Tomi**)
1. when the new build infrastructure works as it should, delete the old ones
   (**Sjur, Tomi**)

## General list

* licensing of our source code
    - the discussion goes on in news - needs to be finished soon
* fit repository:
    - maintenance issues
    - FOSS policy and communication of it
    - what do we actually want to support?
    - structure of repository

Trond will write an e-mail to the `fit` group explaining our situation.

To accommodate future enhancements in different directions (in rough order of
importance):

1. test bench for all parts of our language technology efforts
    1. test bench enhanced, but not yet complete
1. improve Forrest i18n support with static sites
1. reorganise the documentation:
    1. differ between target groups
    1. get better grouping
    1. decide what to write in Forrest and what in wiki
   (cf. [Apertium](http://www.apertium.org/) and
   [http://xixona.dlsi.ua.es/apertium/]) for a similar split)
    1. update/add missing parts
1. migrate lexc lexicons to XML, splitting the task
    1. Name lexica (the Name project)
    1. Dictionaries (already in XML, task is to integrate them)
    1. At least migrate the lexc open POSes (Komi as a pilot case)
1. change the look of the documentation web
1. corpus content moved to Max Planck repositories? Norsk språkbank?
1. update infrastructure to allow content-restricted spellers for special target
  groups

**TODO:**
* make the new SL Server services functional: (**Børre**)
    - group calendars
* Jabber server and group chats: user name issues + lost chat history
  (**Børre**)
* set up corpus mirroring on the XServe again (**Børre**)
* restructure and clean the `script/` directory, using subdirs to categorise
  the scripts (**Ciprian**)
    - please act as suggested, cf comments in the news group
* infrastructure remake: (**Børre, Ciprian, Sjur, Tomi, Trond**)
    - more modularised make / build infra (prepare for smn, sms, sjd, others)
    - merge gt, kt and st into one
    - modularised preprocess and spellrelax
    - alternatives to make:
        - [SCons](http://www.scons.org/)
        - [makepp](http://makepp.sourceforge.net/)
        - [Maven](http://maven.apache.org/) (for java-projects)
        - [CMake](http://www.cmake.org/) - **Sjur** looked at it, and have started to
    experiment
* make a test-all target that runs all tests we have (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
    - delayed until we have restructured the make/build process
* define and document testing routines (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
    - delayed until we have restructured the make/build process

# Linguistics

## North Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

## Lule Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

## South Sámi

**TODO:**
* Prepare texts about normativity issue to SGL/SGM (**Maja, Thomas**)
* adjectives (**Maja** with **Thomas, Trond, Sjur**)
    - two competing naming conventions of continuation lexicons
        - One naming goes ATTRSUFF-PREDSUFF-STEMTYPE
        - One follows the sme convention of naming key adjectives
        - There are duplicate lexica
    - The comparative issue open here and there
        - The ATTRSUFF-PREDSUFF-STEMTYPE lexica now go to EVENCOMP and
    ODDCOMP only.
* add compound tags (**Thomas**)
* write letter to Fylkesmannen i Nordland (**Sjur**)
* check verb Umlaut for several verbs (**Maja, Sjur, Thomas, Trond**)

# Name lexicon/risten.no infrastructure

**Tomi** has played with [couchdb](http://couchdb.apache.org/) as a replacement
for eXist in risten.no and general dictionary-related work. Seems much lighter
and easier to work with.

Instead of building our own webforms and back-end update scripts, use XForms
with a premade connection to our xml db. Orbeon XForms is such a tool (open
source).

From the meeting with the terminology and IT teams last week:
* no major rework on the present search interface now
* no work on the editing section; instead:
* add existing lists of sanctioned terminology as separate term entities
* add a dictionary if we can make one with sufficient quality

This means the following tasks:
* find already approved lists, in paper or electronic form (**term team**)
* convert paper lists to electronic lists (**term team**)
* convert lists to standard XML (**Sjur, Tomi**)
* add prepared lists to risten.no (**Sjur, Tomi**)

**TODO:**
1. fix i18n bug in risten.no/G5 (so they will work without the proper locale
  request) (**Sjur**)
1. fix bugs in lexc2xml; add comments to the log element (**Saara**)
1. finish first version of the editing (**Sjur**)
1. test editing of the xml files. If ok, then: (**Sjur, Thomas, Trond**)
1. make terms-smX.xml <=== automatically from propernoun-sme-lex.xml (add `nob`
  as well) (the morphological section should be kept intact, in e.g.
  propernoun-sme-morph.txt) (**Sjur, Saara**)
1. convert propernoun-($lang)-lex.txt to a derived file from common xml files
  (**Sjur, Tomi, Saara**)
1. implement data synchronisation between [risten.no](http://www.risten.no) and
  the cvs repo, and possibly other servers (ie the G5 as an alternative server
  to the public risten.no - it might be faster and better suited than the
  official one; also local installations could be treated the same way)
1. start to use the xml file as source file
1. clean terms-sme.xml such that all names have the correct tag for their use
  (e.g. @type=secondary) (**Thomas, linguists**)
1. merge placenames which are errouneously in different entries: e.g. Helsinki,
  Helsingfors, Helsset (**linguists**)
1. publish the name lexicon on risten.no (**Sjur**)
1. add missing parallel names for placenames (**linguists**)
1. add informative links between first names like Niillas and Nils
  (**linguists**)

## Dictionaries

Sjurs css/xsl etc. work is a step forward wrt. web dictionaries, and should
(in some version) be one alternative also for real end user use. It still
does not replace what we internally see as The Right Way of Making Web
Dictionaries (what that is is deliberately left unspecified for now).

To be continued...

**TODO:**
* fkv:nob and nob:fkv is **still** scheduled for 18.3. release:
    - content and webpage update (**Trond, Verena**)
    - compile the MacDict and StarDict versions (**Ciprian**)
* kom:fin-eng
    - moved the original kom-lex.xml to the inc-dir and froze it
    - split it by pos into the working_file dir, the ONLY place to work with
   the dictionary entries
    - now, the lexC files are generated via XSLT sheets, no perl scripts
    - adjusted the Makefile
    - prepared the pipeline for compiling the mac dict
    - todo: make a pipeline for StarDict also (as far as I know, **Jaska** has)
   a Linux machine
* set up risten.no on eXist/XServe (as a beta version site) (**Sjur**)
* set up required infra for smenob on risten.no/XServe (**Sjur**)
* Continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
* end user documentation (how to download and install) (**Ciprian, Trond**)
* Contact *Davvi Girji* about cooperation on electronic dictionaries
  (**Sjur**)
* developing the mobile phone version of smenob:
    - http://pfed.info/wksite/
* Komi
    - take out the doublets to a separate file (**Ciprian**)
    - merge the doublets (**Jaska, Trond**)
    - Completing the automaton to some state (**Trond, Jaska, Paula**)

# Proofing tools

## South Sámi

**TODO:**
* Go through the phonrules file (**Thomas**)
* difftest for fst and PL speller (**Sjur**)
* External beta testers:
    - David
    - Jovsset
    - the Røros group
* gold standard testing (**Sjur**)

## HFST-based proofing tools

The work with Voikko+HFST is moving forward.

## Testing

### Spelling Error Markup

**TODO:**
* test new and nested error markup (**Sjur**)
    - nesting still needs to be tested, depends on new `ccat` feature

### Speller testing

**TODO:**
* test the error type selection feature in ccat (**Sjur**)

### Testing open-source Norwegian spellers

**Sjur** has invited the open-source group to test their spell-checker using our
test bench. The response has been positive, we'll see what happens.

We should go to their developer meetings, and present our work and how to work
with language technology.

## Speller bugs

List of bugs returned from Polderland:
* 621
* 630
* 652
* 656
* 676

Tag reordering for abbreviations have caused a lot of problems:

```
smj:
hr.
hr.	hr+ABBR+Acc
cand.philol.
cand.philol.	cand.philol+ABBR+N+Acc
Per
Per	Per+N+Prop+Mal+Sg+Attr

sme:
hr.
hr.	hr+N+ABBR+Acc
Per
Per	Per+N+Prop+Mal+Sg+Attr
```

Open issues based on test results:

### sme
Version: **Davvisámi, version 1.2, 2009-09-18**
* 399 - missing numerals (plural forms) - still **OPEN**
* 425 - X not recognised; single letters were left out - still **OPEN**
* 435 - roman numbers - inflection of single letter numbers
        rejected, as well as some complex numbers (but is ok in `smj`) - still
        **OPEN**
    - we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
   separate lexicon file
* 461 - **REGRESSION:** missing suggestion (sáhkki)
* 508 - **REGRESSION:** accepts smj entries (most likely abbreviation missing)
* 520 - **REGRESSION:** r9 and š9 not defined (abbr. missing)
* 595 - prefix+name without hyphen (*ovdaLot* instead of *ovda-Lot*) - still
        **OPEN**
* 603 - suomabealdi accepted - still **OPEN**
* 606 - compound-tags LEXICON VUOHTA - still **OPEN**
* 613 - short gen. as second compound part - still **OPEN**
* 619 - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails - *vihttasoarttat*
        remaining - still **OPEN**
* 629 - *a* taking part in compounding without hyphen - still **OPEN**
    - only open case has word *A-finálaid* compounded
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still **OPEN**, open case has uppercase letters
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still **OPEN**
* 661 - **REGRESSION:** abbr. not recognized
* 709 - sámedikkeválga accepted - **OPEN**
* 728 - vowel shortening GenCmp+Left-tagged - still **OPEN**
* 779 - caseforms of pronoun okatahat - still **OPEN**
* 785 - does not recognize alphabet-abbr+noun - **OPEN**
* 802 - **NEW:** multiword propernouns
* 803 - **NEW:** FINJU- words accepted single-handed
* 804 - **NEW:** guovttilogát, njealjilogát
* 805 - **NEW:** Nouns+acronyms

### smj
Version: **Julevsáme, version 1.2, 2009-09-20**
* 435 - roman number - single letter numbers now recognised
    -      we should pre-generate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
        separate lexicon file
    -      please note that *inflection* of single letter numerals is **fine** in
        `smj`, as opposed to `sme`
* 482 - *polardutkamin* not recognized - **FIXED**
* 496 - **REGRESSION:** unrecognised clitics
* 556 - non-existent word accepted - **FIXED**
* 594 - *lågenanguoktáj* not recognized - still **OPEN**
* 595 - **REGRESSION:** prefix+name as split comp without hyphen
* 596 - C-giellan is not accepted - still **OPEN**
* 600 - Gen+hyph compound - **FIXED**
* 627 - prefix + hyhpen does not get accepted - **FIXED**
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still **OPEN**, open case has uppercase letters
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still **OPEN**
* 650 - **REGRESSION:** noun prefix+name compound without hyphen
* 652 - UPPERCASE-typos only get acronym-suggestions - still **OPEN**
* 692 - numeral-variants - all but one fixed (*gáktsalågenantjuotakta*), but
        still **OPEN**
* 744 - **REGRESSION:** numerals + clitic
* 803 - **NEW:** VINJU- words accepted single-handed
* 805 - **NEW:** Nouns+acronyms

**TODO:**
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion (**Tomi**)

## Hyphenator bugs

Open issues based on test results :

### sme
Lexicon version: **Davvisámi, version 1.2, 2009-09-18**

No known issues!

### smj
Lexicon version: **Julevsáme, version 1.2, 2009-09-20**
* 670 - Hard hyphen replaced with soft hyphen: *10-biejvvásattja* (the word is
        not rec.; Bug #711) - still **OPEN**

### sma

Command to test the hyphenator:

```
preprocess dev/corp/pressemelding.txt | lookup bin/hyph-sma.fst | cut -f2 | \
lookup bin/hyphrules-sma.fst | grep -v '^$' | cut -f2 | uniq | see
```

**TODO:**
* fix PL hyphenator errors (**Tomi**)
    - almost done - one `smj` bug left

## Installer changes

**TODO:**
* test InDesign installer (**Sjur**)

## User documentation

**TODO:**
* InDesign documentation (**Sjur**)
    - Norwegian translation received from Davvi Girji

## 1.2 release

Content:
* several smj bug fixes
* lexicalisations
* InDesign Mac & Win
* new OOo beta
* improved installers, at least for Mac, preferably also for Windows

# Other

## Thursday inhouse seminar

A **short** (less than 1h) seminar every Thursday at 10 AM. Possible topics:
* next time: regex

## Spring planning

Topics:

* speller test project -> Sjur, Børre, Thomas, X
* speech synthesis -> Sjur, Trond, BA as a starter
* risten.no -> Ciprian, Sjur, Tomi
* Barents project follow-up meeting -> Trond, Sjur
* sme and smj proofing tools, next version -> Thomas, Tomi, Sjur
* HFST-based proofing tools -> Sjur
* MT terminology project -> Trond, Linda, Fran, Kevin

Dates:

* March 1-14: Bodø ([conference](http://www.linguistik.uni-kiel.de/sldr/),
  [program](http://www.linguistik.uni-kiel.de/sldr/Schedule.pdf)):
    - Cip in Bodø 2-5
    - Lene in Bodø 8-12
    - Trond in Bodø 2-4?
* March 23-24: SMA school conference, Trondheim
* May : LREC Malta
* July: ACL Uppsala

## Text to speech

**Tomi** has familiarised himself with the code.

**TODO:**
* put together the preprocessing transducers and scripts (**Tomi**)
* refine syntax / dependency rules (**Biret Ánne**)
* continue public tender process (**Sjur**)

## CAT

Autshumato ITE won't work on the Mac because of Apple software security
policies. It still works fine on Windows and Linux, and could possibly be used
at the Sámi Parliament.

# Next meeting, closing

The next meeting is 08.03.2010, 9.30 Norwegian time.

The meeting was closed at 10:48.

# Appendix - task lists for the next week

## Boerre

* contact Ávvir about renewed corpus cooperation
* Jabber server and group chats: user name issues + lost chat history
* implement language switch for static divvun site
* improve XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Draw document
* `gt/Makefile` remake
* get translations of thank-you letter
* make the new SL Server services functional:
    - group calendars
* set up corpus mirroring on the XServe again
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Ciprian

* infrastructure
    - make a schema/dtd description of the lexC-file (experiment with
  Komi and Romanian)
    - transform sme-lexC files into XML format
    - restructure and clean the script catalogue as suggested in the newsgroup
* GT web:
    - colouring output of the disambiguation
    - add a tree visualizer for the dependency trees
    - add input help for special characters on the tool sites
    - automatise the web statistics
    - filter (English, German, etc.) input using language detection tools
    - put a note on the sites that these are NOT MT tools
    - input help for generating wordforms (dropdown menus).
* Bodø Oahpa:
    - finish the MorfaC implementation
    - finish the setup of the bdoahpa versions on victorio
* Sandbox Oahpa:
    - Numra for Skolt Sámi and Finnish
    - finish the db installation for sb_oahpa
* Running Oahpa:
    - add an Oahpa clock and date excercise (cf. Numra)
    - email notification when the server goes down
    - check the XXX?
* dictionaries, generally:
    - synchronize the source language entries from a specific dictionary with the
   entries in the morphology component (now especially for sma):
   that means nothing then put the entries from dict that are NOT analyzed
   into the lexC files
    - the StarDict on Windows: try the HTML-plugin (that means that users can use
   StarDict 3.2)
    - try to reduce the dict-size on mac: experiment with xPointer, etc.
* Fkv:Nob - Nob:Fkv:
    - compile the dictionaries for both directions and in both formats (internal
   deadline for the first version: 08.03.2010)
    - try to implement a web version of the dictionaries (internal deadline:
   20.01.2010)
* KomEngFin:
    - test the automatic sorting by Komi alphabet in xsl (as discussed
   with **Trond**)
* SmeNob:
    - incorporate the passives into the last version of the sme:nob
* SmaNobSwe:
    - extend the smanobswe dictionary: waiting for data (incorporate the data from
   Maja-Lisa)
* SjdRus:
    - continue the work at the Kildin-Russian dictionary, next internal deadline is
   the Bodø workshop in March 2010
* Corpus:
    - check the processing of new corpus documents (error logging during
   conversion, conversion quality, documentation, etc.)
* Lexicon workshop
    - evaluate the participants' materials
    - write feedback emails to each of participant with an individual electronic
   dictionary
    - contact Kimberly Mäkäräinen and ask whether she might be willing to share
   data with us

## Maja

* add missing sma verbs
* check verb Umlaut for several verbs
* Prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
* more work on `sma` adjectives
* contact authors of `sma` aticles in 9-10 eds. of the yearbook
  *Åarjel-saemieh*
* look at incoming loanwords
* make a goldstandard doc. av SÄPO-dok - korrektur
* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Sjur

* write letter to Fylkesmannen i Nordland
* gold standard testing for `sma`
* difftest for fst and PL speller
* @Barents: plan a meeting/seminar with potential cooperation partners
* @Barents: plan for The Real Thing
* @TTS: continue public tender process
* make **Leif Åge** send out CD's to distribution points
* start Nordplus Sprog project
* Write a formal letter to *Davvi girji* about electronic dictionaries
* make XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
* name db/risten.no
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
* find and contact the correct person in SD, to get the manuscript for all Sámi
  teaching material now being given out to the schools
* write new build commands for make
* when the new build infrastructure works as it should, delete the old ones
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Thomas
* sort out words that do not follow usual Umlaut rules to specific lexica
* change rules for vhn, vhl and similar in julev sámi hyphen-file
* prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
* Digitalize south saami books
* add compound tags for `sma`
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Tomi
* test that the new analysers behave as the old one (=give exactly the same res)
* put together the TTS preprocessing transducers and scripts
* write new build commands
* when the new build infrastructure works as it should, delete the old ones
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
* fix double hyphen bugs
* fix PL `smj` hyphenator bug
* fix PL conversion bugs
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond

* fkv:nob and nob:fkv scheduled for 18.3. release:
    - content and webpage update
* Northern areas
* MT/Terminology
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
