# Meeting setup

* Date: 18.10.2010
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Internet
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat

# Agenda

* Dictionaries release plan
* Divvun release plan

Cf. one of the following, depending on context:
* the upper bar of the SEE window (provided you use the JSPWiki syntax mode)
* the TOC in Forrest-rendered output, like HTML and PDF

# Opening, agenda review, participants

* Opened at 10:02.

# Divvun
* status of sma open issues (bugs: just the number, we won't spend time on the issues themselves; other open issues?)
* documentation
* v2.0 sticker
* installer status
* testing, esp. on MS Office 2010 (Win) and MS Office 2011 (Mac)
    - installation
    - uninstallation
    - usage (no crashes, correct language, etc)
* user documentation - on our site, as part of the installer, etc.
* web pages
* deadlines

34 open bugs: TODO!!

* 595 - prefix+name as split comp without hyphen
* 619 - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails
* 621 - hyphen-suggestions resulting in double hyphen
* 629 - a taking part of compound
* 634 - Prop gen + hyphen + Prop gen
* 641 - numeral+noun compounds
* 644 - cased numeral+numeral compounds
* 647 - numerals+NOUN
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun
* 652 - UPPERCASE-typos only get acronym-suggestions
* 711 - numeral compounds and cases
* 785 - does not recognize alphabet-abbr+noun
* 802 - multi word proper nouns
* 803 - FINJU-/VINJU- words accepted single-handed

* 805 - Nouns+Acronyms
* 826 - gæhtsani 
* 827 - VGen 
* 828 - magkeres 
* 829 - +A+Ord
* 830 - +Ine and +Ela +Attr 
* 831 - gellie not recognized 
* 833 - Gerund odd stem 
* 834 - collective numerals 
* 837 - noun+adjective compounds  
* 845 - compounds with Pl+Gen in second part
* 846 - non existent words accepted
* 869 - sub-marked entries accepted by speller
* 870 - Default compounding
* 889 - number+case
* 890 - proper nouns does not compound
* 891 - millijovne is not recognized
* 892 - noun+Acro without hyphen
* 893 - Vowels in compound - how should we resolve this? 
* 894 - hyphens or not in compounds

* 897 - vervies is not accepted by the speller, but as you can see it compiles in fst.
* 901 - swedish 'ö' in swedish place-names? The "Norsjö" case
* 902 - prefixes not working

Prio for Maja:
* sammensetinger
* wowels in compound - how should we resolve this? - send til SGM i dag! - hvordan vil de normere dem med dobbelvokal- med eller uten bindestrek. info: bindestrek tre like vokaler. Bindestrek mellom alle ord som begynner med dobbelvokal i det andre ordet. Med Polderland - finsk har det slik: altid bindestrek mellom tre like vokaler. Foreløpig løsning.

Vokal + vokal ved ordgrense, der andre ordet byrjar på:
1. lang vokal
1. kort vokal
1. diftong

Bindestrek eller ikkje mellom orda?

Cns - Vow Vow

Cns = n, j, or s

```
[Vow Vow ^ Vow]   aa  ee   - only, NOT ææ, or åå, or öö or ii or oo
```

## SGM Meeting

Unofficial summary for issues relating to Divvun:

### Bindestrek
* alltid med tre vokalar, i prinsippet likt finsk (men finsk deler alltid når to like vokalar møtest)
* always and only for a sequence of three identical vowels: a-aa, e-ee
* ikkje ved ie#ea, or in other cases where two identical vowel meets

### Loan words
Fylgjer Ove Lorentz langt på veg, der Ove legg fram alternativ er det enno ope:
- akseptabel
- akseptaabele e. -abele -> aa

### Orddeling
- prinsipp 2 - ok - fonem blir halde samla, dvs konsonantgrupper som representerer ein lyd blir ikkje delt

### Akronym og kasusendingar
* deleteikn alltid kolon, dvs USA:se, ev. USA:ese
* :se eller :ese enno ope

## Sticker

It is on it's way - Sjur talked to Roger Østby, head of the communication/PR department at SD.

He and his team will also handle meeting room, invitation to the release, etc.

## Translations

Who: Maja+Tomi+Thomas

* front page (all languages, Børre has made major changes, more changes likely to come)
* user documentation + readme
* menyar og flikar

## Documentation updates

* user documentation: new screen shots for new installer
* check the text to see if it is consistent with the new installer

## Testing

Windows testing on the following OS's and Office versions:
* XP (we have it)
* Windows 7 (get it)
* MS Office 2007 (get it)
* MS Office 2010 (get it)

Mac:
* MS Office 2008
* MS Office 2011

Technical testing - what to test:
* installation
* deinstallation
* that the spelling and hyphenation works, etc.

If there are special considerations the user needs to be aware of, make sure to
add it to the documentation.

# Web page(s)

No:
* tre tabellar (1 pr OS)
* kvar tabell har:
    - ei nedlastingslenke
    - ei eller fleire dokumentasjonslenker

```
Latest Divvun tools:
- **Divvun for Windows** (MS Office) - **les meg** - **video**
    [] Download now!

- **Divvun for Mac** (MS Office) - **les meg** - **video**
    [] Download now!

- **Divvun for OpenOffice** - **les meg** - **video**
    [] Download now!

Fleire nedlastingspakker (InDesign, eldre Divvun-versjonar, ...)

Tilleggsdokumentasjon.. info...
```

## Schedule

nov 19: binaries, NSIS Win installer(s) from the Netherlands, new lexicons ready
nov 22: Mac installers ready
nov 26: testing finished
nov 29: backup compilation of lexicons
dec  1: final compilation of lexicons, deadline for user documentation, sticker
dec  2: deadline for cd image
dec  3: cd burning
dec  7: travelling
dec  8: release
