!!!Meeting setup

* Date: 10.5.2010
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Internet
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat

!!!Agenda

Cf. one of the following, depending on context:
* the upper bar of the SEE window (provided you use the JSPWiki syntax mode)
* the TOC in Forrest-rendered output, like HTML and PDF

!!!Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 10:32.

Present:
__Børre, Ciprian, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi, Trond__

Absent: __Maja__ (on study leave)

Agenda accepted as is.

!!!Updated task status since last meeting

!!Børre
* put the school history files into a properly named subdirectory
** not done
* formulate license header
** not done
* add license header to all files
** not done
* make restricted access to our svn repository work ({{fit}} adaption)
** not done
* corpus access on the XServe
** not done
* read access for the rest of our teams + outsiders who have signed the corpus
  usage agreement
** worked on it, no solution yet
* convert or move the files in the {{upload}} dir to the real corpus repo
** not done
* turn on corpus summary crontab
** not done
* contact Ávvir about renewed corpus cooperation
** not done
* implement language switch for static divvun site
** not done
* improve XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Draw document
** not done
* get translations of thank-you letter
** not done
* make the new SL Server services functional:
** group calendars
*** not done
* set up corpus mirroring on the XServe again
** not done
* give Maja a WEbSak intro
** not done
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]
* other:
** debugging tca2
** cpan admin on victorio
** fix downloadable hunspell files so that they work with newer hunspell 
   versions

!!Ciprian
* add license header to all files
** todo
* make restricted access to our svn repository work ({{fit}} adaption)
** todo
* PhD-Projektbeskrivelse (internal deadline April/Mai 2010):
** search, read, write (execute): high priority!
*** ongoing work
* read and answer the newsgroups messages
** todo
* update corpora (both monolingual and parallel) for Oslo (Glossa)
** ongoing work
** check the correctness of parallelity between sme and nob files
*** ongoing work
** sentence-align sme with nob: fix tca2 problem
*** todo 
** analyse/disambiguate: todo -- waiting for the last version of FSTs
* infrastructure
** test cwb
** continue with restructuring and cleaning the script catalogue as suggested
   in the newsgroup
** transform sme-lexC files into XML format
** make a schema/dtd description of the lexC-file (experiment with
   Komi and Romanian)
*** todo
* GT web:
** colouring output of the disambiguation
*** done
** add a tree visualizer for the dependency trees
*** ongoing work
** add input help for special characters on the tool sites
*** todo
** automatise the web statistics
*** todo
** filter (English, German, etc.) input using language detection tools
** put a note on the sites that these are NOT MT tools
** input help for generating wordforms (dropdown menus).
*** todo
* Sandbox Oahpa:
** Numra for Skolt Sámi and Finnish
** debug the installed sb_oahpa
** update and correct the Oapha docu site
*** todo
* Running Oahpa:
** fix Morfa-S related bug after adding Finnish to Leksa
** add an Oahpa clock and date excercise (cf. Numra)
** email notification when the server goes down
** check the XXX?
*** todo
* dictionaries, generally:
** synchronize the source language entries from a specific dictionary with the 
   entries in the morphology component (now especially for sma):
   that means nothing then put the entries from dict that are NOT analyzed
   into the lexC files
** the StarDict on Windows: try the HTML-plugin (that means that users can use
   StarDict 3.2)
** try to reduce the dict-size on mac: experiment with xPointer, etc.
* Fkv:Nob - Nob:Fkv:
** compile the dictionaries for both directions and in both formats (internal
   deadline depending on __Trond__ and __Verena__)
*** done
** try to implement a web version of the dictionaries using the Odense method
*** todo
* KomEngFin:
** test the automatic sorting by Komi alphabet in xsl (as discussed
   with __Trond__)
* SmeNob:
** incorporate the passives into the last version of the sme:nob
** start a new compilation of SmeNob and improve it based on the experience
   gained with SmaNob
* SmaNobSwe:
** extend the smanobswe dictionary: waiting for data (incorporate the data from
   Maja-Lisa)
* SjdRus:
** continue the work at the Kildin-Russian dictionary, next internal deadline
   is the Bodø workshop in March 2010
* Lexicon workshop
** evaluate the participants' materials
** write feedback emails to each of participant with an individual electronic
   dictionary
** contact Kimberly Mäkäräinen and ask whether she might be willing to share
   data with us
*** todo
* MT
** test Apertium integration in A-ITE
*** done
** install A-ITE on __Lene__'s machine: deadline 05.05.2010
*** done
* install a somewhat working copy of A-ITE on Lene's computer (__Ciprian__)
** done
* Permanent education
** learn UML
*** low priority

!!Maja
* check in ''all'' local lexc changes in the {{gt/}} tree - Wednesday afternoon
* add missing sma verbs
* Prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
* more work on {{sma}} adjectives
* look at incoming loanwords
* make a goldstandard doc. av SÄPO-dok - korrektur 
* continue gathering {{sma}} corpus texts
* look at Trond's XXX comments
* finish compound tags for adjectives
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Sjur
* formulate license header
** not done
* add voikko support to our proofing test bench
** working on it
* add all our Sámi analysers to voikko and test them as spellers
** depends partly on the previous point
* run tests using Hunspell, Voikko, Polderland for our Sámi lexicons
** depends on the test bench having voikko support, coming soon
* test Apertium integration in A-ITE
** done, working on a principal level
* meet with Francis, with backup from Tromsø
** done
* install & configure the Unison news reader
* gold standard testing for {{sma}}
** I have tried to test the {{sma}} speller using the {{sme/smj}} tools. It
   doesn't work. Compiling {{sma}} using the {{sme}} lexicon compiler, and then
   test it as if it were {{sme}} should work. That will serve as a workaround
   until we get the proper tools.
* difftest for fst and PL speller
* @Barents: plan a meeting/seminar with potential cooperation partners
* @Barents: plan for The Real Thing
* @TTS: continue public tender process
* make __Leif Åge__ send out CD's to distribution points
* contintue Nordplus Sprog project
* Write a formal letter to ''Davvi girji'' about electronic dictionaries
* make XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
* name db/risten.no
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
* find and contact the correct person in SD, to get the manuscript for all Sámi
  teaching material now being given out to the schools
* write new build commands for make
* when the new build infrastructure works as it should, delete the old ones
* read through and comment by Wednesday afternoon
** delayed till after __Maja__ is back from her study leave
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]
* other things:
** made Forrest work again on my machine (bug introduced in the forrest code in
   December last year)
** added sorting of dictionary files
** added target for making concatenated and sorted dictionary source files in
   svn

!!Thomas
* prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
** nothing done
* Digitalize south saami books
** worked
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]
** nothing done

!!Tomi
* test latest proofing tools, compare results with previous version
** not completed, some perl components missing
* run tests using Hunspell, Voikko, Polderland for our Sámi lexicons
** not done
* ccat update to handle new error markup
** done
* put together the TTS preprocessing transducers and scripts
** not done
* write new build commands
** working
* check out the voikko code
** not done
* try to compile voikko
** not done
* add all our Sámi analysers and test them as spellers
** not done
* when the new build infrastructure works as it should, delete the old ones
** not done
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
** not done
* fix double hyphen bugs
* fix PL {{smj}} hyphenator bug
* fix PL conversion bugs
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Trond
* fkv:nob and nob:fkv scheduled for april release:
** content and webpage update
*** Done
* Northern areas
** Progress as planned.
* MT/Terminology
** Installed and tested Autshomato, otherwise not worked on this
* install updated corpus files in Oslo
** Not done, we need a thorough remake of the corpus files.
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla].

!!!Oahpa!

Nothing new. Possibly Sahka is not working. __Lene__ would like a captcha for
the Oahpa! feedback form, to avoid too much spam.

__TODO__
* Register oahpa.no (__Trond__)
* Generate fin/xml/{nouns|verbs|adjectives}.xml, and implement the new Leksa
  dropdown menu (__Ciprian__).
* From the start: sjd_oahpa Leksa in deu and eng as well  
* clock and date for Numra (__Trond, Ciprian__)
* Numra for Skolt Sámi (__Trond, Ciprian__)
* implement the Bodø-Oahpa (__Ciprian, Trond, Lene__)
* email notification when the server goes down (__Ciprian__)
* Finding a volunteer to translate the sme Leksa lexicon to Swedish (__Trond__)
* check Sahka (__Ciprian__)
* add capcha(?) for the feedback e-mail address (__Ciprian__)

!!!Corpus gathering

__Thomas__ is ''still'' continuously scanning more texts.

__Trond__ has been to the new Språkbanken meeting in Geilo. Nasjonalbiblioteket
has been scanning and digitising enormous amounts of books. Everything in the
public domain or free for our purposes is texts for authors dead before 1940, as
well as all texts published 1990-1999, by agreement with the publishers and
authors union. The free or available texts also includes all Sámi languages.

The text produced by the scanning process is automatically evaluated for OCR
quality, and they are looking for ways to automatically improve the OCR
recognition rate.

__TODO:__
* put the school history files into a properly named subdirectory (__Børre__)
* get all the latest Sámi Parliament protocolls into our repository (__Børre__)
* contact the Sámi translators at the government and ministeries to get more
  parallell texts (__Børre__)
* continue gathering {{sma}} corpus texts (__Maja__)
** get {{sma}} articles in Š-bláđđi
** the Gun Utsi book is almost there - one contract missing (__Maja__)
* write formal letter to Davvi Girji (__Sjur__)
* send a copy of the signed contracts back to the authors, translators and 
  publishers, accompanied by the thank-you letter
* find and contact the correct person in SD, to get the manuscript for all Sámi
  teaching material now being given out to the schools (__Sjur__)
* get the {{sma}} yearbooks from ''Saemien sïjhte'' (__Maja__)
* contact certain {{sma}} writers (__Børre__)
* contact Ávvir about renewed corpus cooperation (__Børre__)
* contact Inga Margrethe Bjørn Eira (__Maja__)
* give Maja a WebSak intro (__Børre__)
* restart the letter mailing thing using WebSak (__Maja__)

!!!Promoting Divvun

__TODO:__
* make leaflet to inform about the project (__Børre__)
** add InDesign text (__Sjur__)
** make XSL script to transform Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
   (__Børre, Sjur__)
* distribute CD version through the library bus, the language centres and
  common sami centres in all of Sápmi. Gaaltije in Östersund for example.
  (__Leif Åge, Sjur__)
** make him send out CD's accordingly (__Sjur__)
* update online download log statistics page (__Børre__)

!!!Future plans, directions and ideas

See a separate document in {{plan/strat/5year.jspwiki}}.

!!Northern areas project

Trip to Syktyvkar forthcoming. 

__TODO:__
* Attend a beginners' course in Russian (priority: the alphabet!) near you..
* plan a meeting/seminar with potential cooperation partners (__Trond, Sjur__)
* plan for The Real Thing (__Trond, Sjur__)

!!!Infrastructure

!!Updated corpus online

See __Ciprian´s__ document about the corpus content in
{{$GTPRIV/plan/corpus/oslo_corpus_update_todo.txt}}.

Issues:
* filenames
* organisation of subdirs?
* content (or lack thereof) of original and converted files
* svn repo reorganisation

__TODO:__
* make the conversion scripts work with the new svn repository
  (__Børre, Ciprian__)
** add check for almost empty content
** add processing of svg files
* reorganise subdirs as needed (__Ciprian, Trond__)
* identify parallel nob files - should be automatic, but needs to be checked
  (__Ciprian__)
* sentence-align sme with nob (__Ciprian__)
** the aligner wasn't working, __Børre__ has tried to fix it
* analyse/disambiguate (__Ciprian__)
* preferably also dep -> check with Oslo if it can be used (__Ciprian__)
* install in Oslo (__Ciprian, Trond__)
* add better handling of unknown strings in our analysers (__???__)

!!Corpus infra remake

__TODO:__
* read access for the rest of our teams + outsiders who have signed the corpus
  usage agreement - presently only ''bound'' group has read access (__Børre__)
* convert or move the files in the {{upload}} dir to the real corpus repo
  (__Børre__)
* turn on corpus summary crontab (__Børre__)

!!License

__TODO:__
* install & configure the Unison news reader (__Sjur__)
* read and comment the license discussion (__all__)
* formulate license header (__Børre, Sjur__)
* add license header to all files (__Børre, Ciprian, everybody__)

!!Corpus interface

This depends on the infrastructure cleanup.

__TODO:__
* make a simple web search form for the UiT corpus repository (__Ciprian, X__)
* check out the new version of CWB with Unicode support (__Ciprian__)
** fall

!!Makefile + tag simplification

Problems with the proofing tools compilation, now solved.

__TODO:__
# test latest proofing tools, compare results with previous version (__Tomi__)
## there are some perl tools missing
### Børre (or someone) installed them
# write new build commands (__Sjur, Tomi__)
## make new targets in parallell to the old ones, not by remaking them
# when the new build infrastructure works as it should, delete the old ones
   (__Sjur, Tomi__)

!!General list

Meänkieli adaptions in our infrastructure.

Requirements:
* separate Subversion repository
* structured roughly as our main repository
* limited access to the closed repo, in the sense that one language group
  should not be able to see the work of another language group (exception for
  administrators) - otherwise it isn't really secret/closed. That is, the FIT
  gang should only see FIT files, and a hypothetical e.g. Estonian gang should
  only see the Estonian files, not the FIT files, etc. But to the extent that
  there are (links to) shared resources the (e.g. links to infrastructure
  things in another place), they should be visible to all groups
* all tools, dtd's, configs work as in and from the main Subversion, such that
  we don't end up with multiple copies. That is, only content files and no
  infrastructure files should be in the closed repo - all the rest should stay
  in the main repo
* we should have scripts that move a full language dir from one repo to the
  other, in both directions, keeping svn history etc.
* the amount of work for setting this up should be minimal, or we have to ask
  them for money

Tentative task list
* figure out the svn dir structure in the closed lang repo, set it up
* figure out how to make the infrastructure in the open/main repo available for
  work in the closed repo (we want to have only one dtd, one XXE config, one
  makefile, etc.)
* when we have an idea of the amount of work, decide whether we just do it, or
  whether we bill them
* implement the previous point
* transfer the language files, preferably using a script for automatic transfer
  and deletion in the open repo
* inform them about the changes

To accommodate future enhancements in different directions (in rough order of
importance):

# test bench for all parts of our language technology efforts
## test bench enhanced, but not yet complete
# improve Forrest i18n support with static sites
# reorganise the documentation:
## differ between target groups
## get better grouping
## decide what to write in Forrest and what in wiki
   (cf. [Apertium|http://www.apertium.org/] and 
   [http://xixona.dlsi.ua.es/apertium/]) for a similar split)
## update/add missing parts
# migrate lexc lexicons to XML, splitting the task
## Name lexica (the Name project)
## Dictionaries (already in XML, task is to integrate them)
## At least migrate the lexc open POSes (Komi as a pilot case)
# change the look of the documentation web
# corpus content moved to Max Planck repositories? Norsk språkbank?
# update infrastructure to allow content-restricted spellers for special target
  groups

__TODO:__
* make restricted access to our svn repository work ({{fit}} adaption)
  (__Børre, Ciprian__)
* make the new SL Server services functional: (__Børre__)
** group calendars
* set up corpus mirroring on the XServe again (__Børre__)
* finish the restructuring  and cleaning of the {{script/}} directory
  __Ciprian__)
* infrastructure remake: (__Børre, Ciprian, Sjur, Tomi, Trond__)
** more modularised make / build infra (prepare for smn, sms, sjd, others)
*** look at omorfi for ideas of how to modularise
** merge gt, kt and st into one
** modularised preprocess and spellrelax
** alternatives to make:
*** [SCons|http://www.scons.org/]
*** [makepp|http://makepp.sourceforge.net/]
*** [Maven|http://maven.apache.org/] (for java-projects)
*** [CMake|http://www.cmake.org/] - __Sjur__ looked at it, and have started to
    experiment
* make a test-all target that runs all tests we have (__Ciprian, Sjur, Trond__)
** delayed until we have restructured the make/build process
* define and document testing routines (__Ciprian, Sjur, Trond__)
** delayed until we have restructured the make/build process

!!!Linguistics

!!North Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

!!Lule Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

!!South Sámi

__TODO:__
* Prepare texts about normativity issue to SGL/SGM (__Maja__)
** look at Trond's XXX comments (__Maja__)
** read through and comment by Wednesday afternoon (__Sjur__)
* adjectives (__Maja__ with __Thomas, Trond, Sjur__)
** two competing naming conventions of continuation lexicons
*** One naming goes ATTRSUFF-PREDSUFF-STEMTYPE
*** One follows the {{sme}} convention of naming key adjectives
*** There are duplicate lexica
** The comparative issue open here and there
*** The ATTRSUFF-PREDSUFF-STEMTYPE lexica now go to EVENCOMP and
    ODDCOMP only.
* finish compound tags for adjectives (__Maja__)

!!!Name lexicon/risten.no infrastructure

__TODO:__
* find already approved lists, in paper or electronic form (__term team__)
* convert paper lists to electronic lists (__term team__)
* convert lists to standard XML (__Sjur, Tomi__)
* add prepared lists to risten.no (__Sjur, Tomi__)
* fix i18n bug in risten.no/G5 (so they will work without the proper locale
  request) (__Sjur__)
* fix bugs in lexc2xml; add comments to the log element (__Saara__)
* finish first version of the editing (__Sjur__)
* test editing of the xml files. If ok, then: (__Sjur, Thomas, Trond__)
* make terms-smX.xml <=== automatically from propernoun-sme-lex.xml (add
  {{nob}} as well) (the morphological section should be kept intact, in e.g.
  propernoun-sme-morph.txt) (__Sjur, Saara__)
* convert propernoun-($lang)-lex.txt to a derived file from common xml files
  (__Sjur, Tomi, Saara__)
* implement data synchronisation between [risten.no|http://www.risten.no] and
  the cvs repo, and possibly other servers (ie the G5 as an alternative server
  to the public risten.no - it might be faster and better suited than the
  official one; also local installations could be treated the same way)
* start to use the xml file as source file
* clean terms-sme.xml such that all names have the correct tag for their use
  (e.g. @type=secondary) (__Thomas, linguists__)
* merge placenames which are errouneously in different entries: e.g. Helsinki,
  Helsingfors, Helsset (__linguists__)
* publish the name lexicon on risten.no (__Sjur__)
* add missing parallel names for placenames (__linguists__)
* add informative links between first names like Niillas and Nils
  (__linguists__)

!!Dictionaries

Released:
* FKV dictionary release: we need a web page (see task list below).
* SME:NOB update release

Other things dictionary-related:
* risten.no data as part of our dictionaries
* dictionaries as part of risten.no
* dictionaries and risten.no as part of Autshumato ITE

__TODO:__
* fkv:nob and nob:fkv is now scheduled for an April release:
** content and webpage update (__Trond, Verena__)
** compile the MacDict and StarDict versions (__Ciprian__)
*** compiled and released
** found a couple of bugs (missing lemma info, "dictionary" missing in both
   languages)
** add version info (1.0.1 + date, subversion revision number?)
* kom:fin-eng
** moved the original kom-lex.xml to the inc-dir and froze it
** split it by pos into the working_file dir, the ONLY place to work with
   the dictionary entries
** now, the lexC files are generated via XSLT sheets, no perl scripts
** adjusted the Makefile
** prepared the pipeline for compiling the mac dict
** todo: make a pipeline for StarDict also (as far as I know, __Jaska__ has)
   a Linux machine
* set up risten.no on eXist/XServe (as a beta version site) (__Sjur__)
* set up required infra for smenob on risten.no/XServe (__Sjur__)
* Continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (__Ciprian, Sjur, Trond__)
* end user documentation (how to download and install) (__Ciprian, Trond__)
* Contact ''Davvi Girji'' about cooperation on electronic dictionaries
  (__Sjur__)
* developing the mobile phone version of smenob:
** [http://pfed.info/wksite/]
* Komi
** take out the doublets to a separate file (__Ciprian__)
** merge the doublets (__Jaska, Trond__)
** Completing the automaton to some state (__Trond, Jaska, Paula__)
* make the sort XSL script available for all languages to keep the source files
  sorted

!!!Proofing tools

!!South Sámi

Beta release: June 1. We should be getting the Polderland (now Knowledge
Concepts - hereafter KC) binaries in the second half of May.

__TODO:__
* difftest for fst and PL speller (__Sjur__)
* External beta testers:
** David
** Jovsset
** the Røros group
* gold standard testing (__Sjur__)

!!HFST- and Voikko-based proofing tools

__TODO:__
* Change the license tag to GPL for voikko inclusion. (see above)
** high priority
* run tests using Hunspell, Voikko, Polderland for our Sámi lexicons
  (__Sjur, Tomi__)
* check out the voikko code, see [this page
  |https://sourceforge.net/apps/trac/voikko/wiki/libvoikko/IntegrationTesting]
  (__Tomi__)
* try to compile it (development is done on Linux, no MacOS X testing so far)
  (__Tomi__)
** not done
* add voikko support to our proofing test bench (__Sjur__)
** done some, not finished
* add all our Sámi analysers and test them as spellers (__Tomi, Sjur__)

!!Testing

Updates and changes to the speller test bench result presentation: two tables combined into one.

Useful feedback.

!Spelling Error Markup

__TODO:__
* ccat update to handle new error markup (__Tomi__)
** done

!Testing open-source Norwegian spellers

__Sjur__ has invited the open-source group to test their spell-checker using
our test bench. The response has been positive, we'll see what happens.

!!Speller bugs

List of bugs returned from Polderland:
* 621
* 630
* 652
* 656
* 676

Tag reordering for abbreviations have caused a lot of problems:

{{{
smj:
hr.
hr.	hr+ABBR+Acc
cand.philol.
cand.philol.	cand.philol+ABBR+N+Acc
Per
Per	Per+N+Prop+Mal+Sg+Attr

sme:
hr.
hr.	hr+N+ABBR+Acc
Per
Per	Per+N+Prop+Mal+Sg+Attr
}}}

Open issues based on test results:

!sme
Version: __Davvisámi, version 1.2, 2009-09-18__
* 399 - missing numerals (plural forms) - still __OPEN__
* 425 - X not recognised; single letters were left out - still __OPEN__
* 435 - roman numbers - inflection of single letter numbers
        rejected, as well as some complex numbers (but is ok in {{smj}}) -
        still __OPEN__
** we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
        separate lexicon file
* 461 - __REGRESSION:__ missing suggestion (sáhkki)
* 508 - __REGRESSION:__ accepts smj entries (most likely abbreviation missing)
* 520 - __REGRESSION:__ r9 and š9 not defined (abbr. missing)
* 595 - prefix+name without hyphen (''ovdaLot'' instead of ''ovda-Lot'') -
        still __OPEN__
* 603 - suomabealdi accepted - still __OPEN__
* 606 - compound-tags LEXICON VUOHTA - still __OPEN__
* 613 - short gen. as second compound part - still __OPEN__
* 619 - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails - ''vihttasoarttat''
        remaining - still __OPEN__
* 629 - ''a'' taking part in compounding without hyphen - still __OPEN__
** only open case has word ''A-finálaid'' compounded
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still __OPEN__, open case has uppercase letters
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still __OPEN__
* 661 - __REGRESSION:__ abbr. not recognized
* 709 - sámedikkeválga accepted - __OPEN__
* 728 - vowel shortening GenCmp+Left-tagged - still __OPEN__
* 779 - caseforms of pronoun okatahat - still __OPEN__
* 785 - does not recognize alphabet-abbr+noun - __OPEN__
* 802 - __NEW:__ multiword propernouns
* 803 - __NEW:__ FINJU- words accepted single-handed
* 804 - __NEW:__ guovttilogát, njealjilogát
* 805 - __NEW:__ Nouns+acronyms

!smj
Version: __Julevsáme, version 1.2, 2009-09-20__
* 435 - roman number - single letter numbers now recognised
**      we should pre-generate all numbers once and for all, and store them in
        a separate lexicon file
**      please note that ''inflection'' of single letter numerals is __fine__
        in {{smj}}, as opposed to {{sme}}
* 482 - ''polardutkamin'' not recognized - __FIXED__
* 496 - __REGRESSION:__ unrecognised clitics
* 556 - non-existent word accepted - __FIXED__
* 594 - ''lågenanguoktáj'' not recognized - still __OPEN__
* 595 - __REGRESSION:__ prefix+name as split comp without hyphen
* 596 - C-giellan is not accepted - still __OPEN__
* 600 - Gen+hyph compound - __FIXED__
* 627 - prefix + hyhpen does not get accepted - __FIXED__
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still __OPEN__, open case has uppercase letters
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still __OPEN__
* 650 - __REGRESSION:__ noun prefix+name compound without hyphen
* 652 - UPPERCASE-typos only get acronym-suggestions - still __OPEN__
* 692 - numeral-variants - all but one fixed (''gáktsalågenantjuotakta''), but
        still __OPEN__
* 744 - __REGRESSION:__ numerals + clitic
* 803 - __NEW:__ VINJU- words accepted single-handed
* 805 - __NEW:__ Nouns+acronyms

__TODO:__
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion (__Tomi__)

!!Hyphenator bugs

Open issues based on test results :

!sme
Lexicon version: __Davvisámi, version 1.2, 2009-09-18__

No known issues!

!smj
Lexicon version: __Julevsáme, version 1.2, 2009-09-20__
* 670 - Hard hyphen replaced with soft hyphen: ''10-biejvvásattja'' (the word
        is not rec.; Bug #711) - still __OPEN__

!sma

Command to test the hyphenator:

{{{
preprocess dev/corp/pressemelding.txt | lookup bin/hyph-sma.fst | cut -f2 | \
lookup bin/hyphrules-sma.fst | grep -v '^$' | cut -f2 | uniq | see
}}}

__TODO:__
* fix PL hyphenator errors (__Tomi__)
** almost done - one {{smj}} bug left

!!Installer changes

__TODO:__
* test InDesign installer (__Sjur__)

!!User documentation

__TODO:__
* InDesign documentation (__Sjur__)
** Norwegian translation received from Davvi Girji

!!1.2 release

Content:
* several smj bug fixes
* lexicalisations
* InDesign Mac & Win
* new OOo beta
* improved installers, at least for Mac, preferably also for Windows

!!!Other

!!Thursday inhouse seminar

Next time suggestion list: 
# introduction to xslt - __Ciprian__ to start out
##  relevant xslt issues:
##  basic principles of xslt …
##  sorting in xslt … (have a look at the dictionary sort xslt script)
##  converting from one xml format to another wilt xslt (sugg: convert from
    DivvunGT dictionary dtd to MacDict xml)

Future seminars:
# XQuery
# More XML (needs concretisation)
# UML
# other suggestions?

!!Spring planning

Topics:

* speller test project -> Sjur, Børre, Thomas, X
* speech synthesis -> Sjur, Trond, BA as a starter
* risten.no -> Ciprian, Sjur, Tomi
* Barents project follow-up meeting -> Trond, Sjur
* sme and smj proofing tools, next version -> Thomas, Tomi, Sjur
* HFST-based proofing tools -> Sjur
* MT terminology project -> Trond, Linda, Fran, Kevin
* HSL centre status -> Trond

Dates:

* May 4-5: Lene, Giellagiella
* May: LREC Malta: WS: 17-18, Conf. 19-21, WS 22-23
** Trond
** Lene
** Linda
** Sjur?
* July: ACL Uppsala
* August: IceTAL, Reykjavik
* September 8: Konvens-workshop Saarbrücken: LT and text-technological methods
  for e-learning http://konvens2010.de/workshop_en.html: 
** Lene will try to get an abstract accepted, deadline 16.5
** Trond?

!!Text to speech

__TODO:__
* put together the preprocessing transducers and scripts (__Tomi__)
* refine syntax / dependency rules (__Biret Ánne__)
* continue public tender process (__Sjur__)

!!CAT

Autshomato has been installed for some of us. It is up and running, wit UTF-8 problems for 10.5 and not for 10.6.

Sjur will go to Karasjok to present state-of-art for Divvun, and Autshomato, ''with'' MT. We have a problem specifying what language to translate, but we got feendback from South Africa. Priority: Change Autshomato to do MT for the language pair under consideration. Deadline for this feature is 

__TODO:__
* test Apertium integration with A-ITE (__Ciprian, Sjur__)
** done
* convert our dictionaries to A-ITE format, so that they can be used directly
  in there (__???__)
* meet with Francis, with backup from Tromsø (__Sjur__ + __Børre, Ciprian__)
** keep __Lene__ informed
** done
* install a somewhat working copy of A-ITE on Lene's computer (__Ciprian__)
** done
* add support for dynamicaly setting MT language pair based on translation 
  languages. Deadline: friday (__Ciprian__)

!!Norsk språkbank

Sámi will form a  part of Norsk språkbank. We should consider candidates
for pilot content (preferably terminology or bilingual text) for a first
presentation of Språkbanken.

!!Summer vacations

|| Name   || Dates
| Børre   | Dates
| Ciprian | Dates
| Maja    | Dates
| Sjur    | Dates
| Thom    | 5 weeks between 21/6-13/8
| Tomi    | Dates
| Trond   | Dates

!!!Next meeting, closing

The next meeting is 18.5.2010, 09:30 Norwegian time.

The meeting was closed at 12:00.

!!!Appendix - task lists for the next week

!!Boerre
[iCal|/doc/admin/weekly/2010/Tasks_2010-05-10_Boerre.ics]
* get all the latest Sámi Parliament protocolls into our repository
* contact the Sámi translators at the government and ministeries to get more
  parallell texts
* corpus infra:
** make the conversion scripts work with the new svn repository
*** add check for almost empty content
*** add processing of svg files
* put the school history files into a properly named subdirectory
* formulate license header
* add license header to all files
* make restricted access to our svn repository work ({{fit}} adaption)
* corpus access on the XServe
* read access for the rest of our teams + outsiders who have signed the corpus
  usage agreement
* convert or move the files in the {{upload}} dir to the real corpus repo
* turn on corpus summary crontab
* contact Ávvir about renewed corpus cooperation
* implement language switch for static divvun site
* improve XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Draw document
* get translations of thank-you letter
* make the new SL Server services functional:
** group calendars
* set up corpus mirroring on the XServe again
* give Maja a WEbSak intro
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Ciprian
[iCal|/doc/admin/weekly/2010/Tasks_2010-05-10_Ciprian.ics]
* add license header to all files
* make restricted access to our svn repository work ({{fit}} adaption)
* PhD-Projektbeskrivelse (internal deadline April/Mai 2010):
** search, read, write (execute): high priority!
* read and answer the newsgroups messages
* update corpora (both monolingual and parallel) for Oslo (Glossa)
** check the correctness of parallelity between sme and nob files
** sentence-align sme with nob: fix tca2 problem
** analyse/disambiguate: todo -- waiting for the last version of FSTs
* corpus infra:
** make the conversion scripts work with the new svn repository
*** add check for almost empty content
*** add processing of svg files
** reorganise subdirs as needed
* infrastructure
** test cwb
** continue with restructuring and cleaning the script catalogue as suggested
   in the newsgroup
** transform sme-lexC files into XML format
** make a schema/dtd description of the lexC-file (experiment with
   Komi and Romanian)
* GT web:
** add a tree visualizer for the dependency trees
** add input help for special characters on the tool sites
** automatise the web statistics
** filter (English, German, etc.) input using language detection tools
** put a note on the sites that these are NOT MT tools
** input help for generating wordforms (dropdown menus).
* Sandbox Oahpa:
** integrate reCAPTCHA into Django (as __Lene__ suggested)
** Numra for Skolt Sámi and Finnish
** debug the installed sb_oahpa
** update and correct the Oapha docu site
* Running Oahpa:
** fix Morfa-S related bug after adding Finnish to Leksa
** integrate reCAPTCHA after the SB-test
** add an Oahpa clock and date excercise (cf. Numra)
** email notification when the server goes down
** check the XXX?
* dictionaries, generally:
** synchronize the source language entries from a specific dictionary with the 
   entries in the morphology component (now especially for sma):
   that means nothing then put the entries from dict that are NOT analyzed
   into the lexC files
** the StarDict on Windows: try the HTML-plugin (that means that users can use
   StarDict 3.2)
** try to reduce the dict-size on mac: experiment with xPointer, etc.
* Fkv:Nob - Nob:Fkv:
** compile the dictionaries for both directions and in both formats (internal
   deadline depending on __Trond__ and __Verena__)
** try to implement a web version of the dictionaries using the Odense method
* KomEngFin:
** test the automatic sorting by Komi alphabet in xsl (as discussed
   with __Trond__)
* SmeNob:
** incorporate the passives into the last version of the sme:nob
** start a new compilation of SmeNob and improve it based on the experience
   gained with SmaNob
* SmaNobSwe:
** extend the smanobswe dictionary: waiting for data (incorporate the data from
   Maja-Lisa)
* SjdRus:
** continue the work at the Kildin-Russian dictionary, next internal deadline
   is the Bodø workshop in March 2010
* Lexicon workshop
** contact Kimberly Mäkäräinen and ask whether she might be willing to share
   data with us
* MT
** add proper language pair (deadline by this Friday)
** test A-ITE on Windows
* Permanent education
** prepare/update XLS course materials
** learn UML


!!Maja
[iCal|/doc/admin/weekly/2010/Tasks_2010-05-10_Maja.ics]
* check in ''all'' local lexc changes in the {{gt/}} tree - Wednesday afternoon
* add missing sma verbs
* Prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
* more work on {{sma}} adjectives
* look at incoming loanwords
* make a goldstandard doc. av SÄPO-dok - korrektur 
* continue gathering {{sma}} corpus texts
* look at Trond's XXX comments
* finish compound tags for adjectives
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Sjur
[iCal|/doc/admin/weekly/2010/Tasks_2010-05-10_Sjur.ics]
* formulate license header
* add voikko support to our proofing test bench
* add all our Sámi analysers and test them as spellers
* run tests using Hunspell, Voikko, Polderland for our Sámi lexicons
* install & configure the Unison news reader
* gold standard testing for {{sma}}
* difftest for fst and PL speller
* @Barents: plan a meeting/seminar with potential cooperation partners
* @Barents: plan for The Real Thing
* @TTS: continue public tender process
* make __Leif Åge__ send out CD's to distribution points
* contintue Nordplus Sprog project
* Write a formal letter to ''Davvi girji'' about electronic dictionaries
* make XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
* name db/risten.no
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
* find and contact the correct person in SD, to get the manuscript for all Sámi
  teaching material now being given out to the schools
* write new build commands for make
* when the new build infrastructure works as it should, delete the old ones
* read through and comment by Wednesday afternoon
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Thomas
* prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
* Digitalize south saami books
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Tomi
* test latest proofing tools, compare results with previous version
* run tests using Hunspell, Voikko, Polderland for our Sámi lexicons
* put together the TTS preprocessing transducers and scripts
* write new build commands
* check out the voikko code
* try to compile voikko
* add all our Sámi analysers and test them as spellers
* when the new build infrastructure works as it should, delete the old ones
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
* fix double hyphen bugs
* fix PL {{smj}} hyphenator bug
* fix PL conversion bugs
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Trond
[iCal|/doc/admin/weekly/2010/Tasks_2010-05-10_Trond.ics]
* corpus infra:
** reorganise subdirs as needed
* Northern areas
* MT/Terminology
* install updated corpus files in Oslo
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla].
