# Meeting setup

* Date: 10.8.2010 (moved one day)
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Internet
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat

# Agenda

Cf. one of the following, depending on context:
* the upper bar of the SEE window (provided you use the JSPWiki syntax mode)
* the TOC in Forrest-rendered output, like HTML and PDF

# Opening, agenda review, participants

* Opened at 10:06.
* Present: **Ciprian, Maja, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi, Trond**
* Absent: **Børre** (vacation)
* Agenda accepted as is

# Updated task status since last meeting

## Børre
on vacation

## Ciprian
* `sma` seminar in August/September:
    - make preliminary program
        - todo
* Skolt-Oahpa:
    - fine tuning of semantic tags
    - finish localization
        - todo
* terminology:
    - merged the 2 doc files with the xls file containing the 2006 law terminology
   db
    - prepare a StarDict test version of the merged data for demo
    - compile a dictionary in StarDict format with all data featuring the
   properties wished by Ellen Ravna
        - todo
* add license header to all files
* PhD-Projektbeskrivelse (internal deadline end of June 2010):
    - search, read, write (execute): high priority!
        - very much done: reading, research, starting to write
* read and answer the newsgroups messages
* update corpora (both monolingual and parallel) for Oslo (Glossa)
    - check the correctness of parallelity between sme and nob files
    - sentence-align sme with nob: fix tca2 problem
    - analyse/disambiguate: todo -- waiting for the last version of FSTs
        - todo
* corpus infra:
    - make the conversion scripts work with the new svn repository
        - add check for almost empty content
        - add processing of svg files
    - reorganise subdirs as needed
        - todo
* infrastructure
    - test cwb
    - continue with restructuring and cleaning the script catalogue as suggested
   in the newsgroup
    - transform sme-lexC files into XML format
    - make a schema/dtd description of the lexC-file (experiment with
   Komi and Romanian)
        - todo
* GT web:
    - add a tree visualizer for the dependency trees
    - add input help for special characters on the tool sites
    - automatise the web statistics
    - filter (English, German, etc.) input using language detection tools
    - put a note on the sites that these are NOT MT tools
    - input help for generating wordforms (dropdown menus).
        - todo
* Sandbox Oahpa:
    - integrate reCAPTCHA into Django (as **Lene** suggested)
    - debug the installed sb_oahpa
    - update and correct the Oapha docu site
        - todo
* Running Oahpa:
    - implement a testbench for Vasta (as **Lene** needs)
    - integrate reCAPTCHA after the SB-test
    - add an Oahpa clock and date excercise (cf. Numra)
    - email notification when the server goes down
    - check the XXX?
        - todo
* Sjd/Kom/Sms/Etc-Oahpa
    - try to implement and embed virtual keyboards for each specific Oahpa
    - try to learn something about compiling keyboard in general
        - todo
* dictionaries, generally:
    - synchronize the source language entries from a specific dictionary with the
   entries in the morphology component (now especially for sma):
   that means nothing then put the entries from dict that are NOT analyzed
   into the lexC files
    - the StarDict on Windows: try the HTML-plugin (that means that users can use
   StarDict 3.2)
    - try to reduce the dict-size on mac: experiment with xPointer, etc.
        - todo
* Fkv:Nob - Nob:Fkv:
    - incorporate novel glossary into the dict
    - try to implement a web version of the dictionaries in HTML
        - todo
* KomEngFin:
    - test the automatic sorting by Komi alphabet in xsl (as discussed
   with **Trond**)
        - todo
* SmeNob:
    - incorporate the passives into the last version of the sme:nob
    - start a new compilation of SmeNob and improve it based on the experience
   gained with SmaNob
        - todo
* SmaNobSwe:
    - extend the smanobswe dictionary: waiting for data (incorporate the data from
   Maja-Lisa)
        - todo
* SjdRus:
    - continue the work at the Kildin-Russian dictionary, next internal deadline
   is after finishing the PhD project description
        - todo
* Lexicon workshop
    - contact Kimberly Mäkäräinen and ask whether she might be willing to share
   data with us
        - todo
* MT
    - test A-ITE on Windows
        - todo
* Permanent education
    - prepare/update XLS course materials
    - learn UML
        - low priority

## Maja
* `sma` seminar in August/September:
    - send letter
***done
* Prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
**done-sent to Ove Lorentz
* more work on `sma` adjectives
**to do
* look at incoming loanwords
**to do
* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts
**to do
* finish compound tags for adjectives
**to do
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
**to do

## Sjur
* Course plan for Barents meeting/seminar, october. Financing must be in place.
    - financing asked for from the Norw. MoFA
* test the `sma` speller on the gold standard document
    - is the gold standard document ready?
* add voikko support to our proofing test bench
    - not finished
* add all our Sámi analysers to voikko and test them as spellers
    - will do as soon as voikko support is done
* run tests using Hunspell, Voikko, Polderland for our Sámi lexicons
    - TBD
* install & configure the Unison news reader
    - still missing B-Á
* difftest for fst and PL speller
    - TBD
* Northern areas
    - plan a meeting/seminar in Tromsø
        - see above
    - make a plan for the first two years, update overall plan
* @TTS: continue public tender process
* make **Leif Åge** send out CD's to distribution points
* contintue Nordplus Sprog project
    - continuing - we have two summer trainees, and there has been several bug
   fixes to the conrpus conversion (needed to go from error markup to xml, used
   as input to the test bench)
* Write a formal letter to *Davvi girji* about electronic dictionaries
* make XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
* name db/risten.no
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
* find and contact the correct person in SD, to get the manuscript for all Sámi
  teaching material now being given out to the schools
* write new build commands for make
    - done by Tomi
* when the new build infrastructure works as it should, delete the old ones
* read through and comment by Wednesday afternoon
* test the new build commands and their fst's: `make NEW-fst TARGET=sme` etc.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Thomas
* test the new build commands and their fst's: `make NEW-fst TARGET=sme` etc.
    - done
* prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
    - not anything
* Digitalize south saami books
    - worked
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - worked

## Tomi
* run tests using Hunspell, Voikko, Polderland for our Sámi lexicons
    - not done
* put together the TTS preprocessing transducers and scripts
    - not done
* write new build commands
    - done
* try to compile voikko
    - done, but huge amount of errors
* add all our Sámi analysers and test them as spellers
* when the new build infrastructure works as it should, delete the old ones
    - not done
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
* fix double hyphen bugs
* fix PL `smj` hyphenator bug
* fix PL conversion bugs
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond
* Course plan for Barents meeting/seminar, october. Financing must be in place.
    - Program sketch, awaiting feedback.
* test the new build commands and their fst's: `make NEW-fst TARGET=sme` etc.
    - Overlooked this one totally.
* corpus infra:
    - reorganise subdirs as needed
    - Not done.
* Northern areas
    - Report from journey to FM/UD
        - Not given in form of a report, hmm.
    - plan a meeting/seminar in Tromsø
        - Worked on it.
    - make a plan for the first two years, update overall plan
        - Not done
* MT/Terminology
    - Infra, compilation, etc.
        - Worked on MT, also on MT-infra. Added a new pair, sme-sma, with Francis.
* Set up a yearly report catalogue
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).

# Oahpa!

See notes under SMA seminar in Trondheim further down.

**TODO**
* Register oahpa.no (**Trond**)
* From the start: sjd_oahpa Leksa in deu and eng as well (**Ciprian**)
    - delayed
* clock and date for Numra (**Ciprian**)
* activate numra for Skolt Sámi (**Ciprian**)
* email notification when the server goes down (**Ciprian**)
* Finding a volunteer to translate the sme Leksa lexicon to Swedish (**Trond**)
    - found, but he has no time to do it
* add Captcha for the feedback e-mail address (**Ciprian**)

# Corpus gathering

National Library: there is a meeting in September, to which Trond is going.
Trond will request a couple of Sámi OCR-ed texts (together with the `nob`
texts we already have), and use them as test cases for spell-checking and
(automatically) correcting the OCR-ed texts.

This work should be incorporated in the test bench project, and serve as a
basis for developing a better `nob` (and potentially `nno` as well)
morphologies, to be used in our different projects. The main project,
developing an OCR-adapted Norwegian spell-checker (as open source) should be
financed by the Language bank.

There are starting points both in our own svn and in Apertium, both based on
the lexicons from UiO/Norsk ordbank.

Our main goal with this would be to help the Language bank and the Natinal
Library provide us with usable Sámi (and possibly Norwegian) corpus material,
but there are a number of other secondary goals and positive side effects of
this as well.

**TODO:**
* get all the latest Sámi Parliament protocolls into our repository (**Børre**)
* contact the Sámi translators at the government and ministeries to get more
  parallell texts (**Børre**)
* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts (**Maja**)
    - get `sma` articles in Š-bláđđi
    - the Gun Utsi book is almost there - one contract missing (**Maja**)
* write formal letter to Davvi Girji (**Sjur**)
* send a copy of the signed contracts back to the authors, translators and
  publishers, accompanied by the thank-you letter
* find and contact the correct person in SD, to get the manuscript for all Sámi
  teaching material now being given out to the schools (**Sjur**)
* get the `sma` yearbooks from *Saemien sïjhte* (**Maja**)
* contact certain `sma` writers (**Børre**)
* contact Inga Margrethe Bjørn Eira (**Maja**)
* give Maja a WebSak intro (**Børre**)
* restart the letter mailing thing using WebSak (**Maja**)

# Promoting Divvun

**Rune Fjelheim** suggested last week that we should start a separate project
to inform about, teach about and install our language technology tools (not
only Divvun). This would also make a very good feedback channel.

**TODO:**
* make leaflet to inform about the project (**Børre**)
    - add InDesign text (**Sjur**)
    - make XSL script to transform Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
   (**Børre, Sjur**)
* distribute CD version through the library bus, the language centres and
  common sami centres in all of Sápmi. Gaaltije in Östersund for example.
  (**Leif Åge, Sjur**)
    - make him send out CD's accordingly (**Sjur**)
* update online download log statistics page (**Børre**)

# Future plans, directions and ideas

See a separate document in `plan/strat/5year.jspwiki`.

## Northern areas project

First major obstacle: make working keyboards and fonts.
In principle, there are two approaches to keyboards:

1. Make the Russian-based keyboards work
1. Design new Kildin-optimized keyboards

The first goal has priority. We should have text analysis in order to consider
whether the second goal is feasible. Trond to follow up test machines.

* Choice of fonts
* Rendering of fonts in MS Word and other important programs
* Keyboard layout
    - Empirical phase: What keyboards are around
    - Design phase: Make the optimal keyboards -- for all OSes

Write trustworthy and detailed documentation (in Russian)

What we know:
* you can type on some computers (Michael R: it works), not on others. Q: what
  are the differences between the two types of computers?
* some fonts can't display the chars, others can (but usually ugly)

**TODO:**
* Report from journey to FM/UD (**Trond**)
    - done
* Course plan for meeting/seminar, october. Financing must be in place.
  (**Trond, Sjur**)
* Attend a beginners' course in Russian (priority: the alphabet!) near you..
* make a plan for the first two years, update overall plan (**Trond, Sjur**)
* Follow up Windows test machines
    - Done, no machines yet, so more follow-up needed.

# Infrastructure

Out of the box experiences:
* fao could not be compiled out of the box (the Oslo gang tried) because of a
  missing `tmp` dir
* our list of software to install is incomplete or lacking installation
  instructions
* external tools require manual installation
* there are bugs in the gtsetup.sh script

## Updated corpus online

See **Ciprian´s** document about the corpus content in
`$GTPRIV/plan/corpus/oslo_corpus_update_todo.txt`.

Issues:
* filenames
* organisation of subdirs?
* content (or lack thereof) of original and converted files
* svn repo reorganisation

```
facta$convert2xml.pl --nolog --corpdir=/usr/local/share/corp L1allOrt.correct.txt
```

Error message:
```
sh: /home/sjur/gtmain/gt/script/text_cat: No such file or directory
L1allOrt.correct.txt: ERROR errors in /home/sjur/gtmain/gt/script/text_cat -q \
   -x -d /home/sjur/gtmain/gt/script/LM "/usr/local/share/corp/tmp/L1allOrt.correct.txt.tmp0":
```

`text_cat` isn't part of our repository, we need to add it - we are using a
modified version of the original file. It should be added with a short README
and some license info, pointing to the original.

**TODO:**
* make the conversion scripts work with the new svn repository
  (**Børre, Ciprian**)
    - add check for almost empty content
        - already implemented in convert2xml.pl. Still empty or almost empty files
    are converted. This is because of unexpected structure of content, so that
    the conversion goes wrong, and leaves no real content in the resulting xml
    file.
    - add processing of svg files
        - not done
* reorganise subdirs as needed (**Ciprian, Trond**)
    - not yet done
* identify parallel nob files - should be automatic, but needs to be checked
  (**Ciprian**)
* sentence-align sme with nob (**Ciprian**)
    - the aligner wasn't working, **Børre** has tried to fix it
        - not yet fixed - bug not found
* analyse/disambiguate (**Ciprian**)
* preferably also dep -> check with Oslo if it can be used (**Ciprian**)
* install in Oslo (**Ciprian, Trond**)
* add better handling of unknown strings in our analysers (**???**)

## Corpus infra remake

**Børre** has worked on improving the `convert2xml.pl` script.

**TODO:**
* convert or move the files in the `upload` dir to the real corpus repo
  (**Børre**)
    - almost finished, moved files to both `bound/` and `free/`, will soon
   write documentation on how to use the new corpus infra
* turn on corpus summary crontab (**Børre**)
* needs to check the conversion from old rcs corpus repository to new svn-based
  repository (**Ciprian**)
* add checkout of the free corpus to the gtsetup.sh script (**Børre, Sjur**)
* add checkout of the bound corpus when on victorio (**Børre, Sjur**)

## License

**TODO:**
* install & configure the Unison news reader (**Sjur**)

## Corpus interface

This depends on the infrastructure cleanup.

**TODO:**
* make a simple web search form for the UiT corpus repository (**Ciprian, X**)
* check out the new version of CWB with Unicode support (**Ciprian**)
    - fall

## Makefile + tag simplification

Problems with the proofing tools compilation, now solved.

**TODO:**
1. test latest proofing tools, compare results with previous version (**Tomi**)
    1. done long ago
1. write new build commands (**Sjur, Tomi**)
    1. make new targets in parallell to the old ones, not by remaking them
    1. use a prefix or suffix to make the new targets easily identifyable during
   the rewrite phase. We'll remove the prefix/suffix as soon as everything is
   working fine.
        1. a first version commited, prefix is `NEW-*`
1. test the new build commands (**Sjur, Trond, Lene, Thomas**)
    1. kommando: `make TARGET=sme NEW-fst` etc.
    1. test by comparing the output of the old and new analysers - it should be
   identical. Test both analysis and generation (ie all your favourite usecases)
1. when the new build infrastructure works as it should, delete the old ones
   (**Sjur, Tomi**)

## HFST compilation

Our HFST transducers do still contain all the extra tags resulting from the tag
conversion (cf above). The Apertium versions do not, however. The main problem
here is the forking of smi transducer builing and maintenance - one branch in
Giellatekno, and another in Apertium. This is not good for future maintenance,
and should be corrected ASAP. The tag-removing make steps should be
incorporated in the giellatekno svn.

## General list

Meänkieli adaptions in our infrastructure.

Requirements:
* separate Subversion repository
* structured roughly as our main repository
* limited access to the closed repo, in the sense that one language group
  should not be able to see the work of another language group (exception for
  administrators) - otherwise it isn't really secret/closed. That is, the FIT
  gang should only see FIT files, and a hypothetical e.g. Estonian gang should
  only see the Estonian files, not the FIT files, etc. But to the extent that
  there are (links to) shared resources the (e.g. links to infrastructure
  things in another place), they should be visible to all groups
* all tools, dtd's, configs work as in and from the main Subversion, such that
  we don't end up with multiple copies. That is, only content files and no
  infrastructure files should be in the closed repo - all the rest should stay
  in the main repo
* we should have scripts that move a full language dir from one repo to the
  other, in both directions, keeping svn history etc.
* the amount of work for setting this up should be minimal, or we have to ask
  them for money

Tentative task list
* figure out the svn dir structure in the closed lang repo, set it up
* figure out how to make the infrastructure in the open/main repo available for
  work in the closed repo (we want to have only one dtd, one XXE config, one
  makefile, etc.)
* when we have an idea of the amount of work, decide whether we just do it, or
  whether we bill them
* implement the previous point
* transfer the language files, preferably using a script for automatic transfer
  and deletion in the open repo
* inform them about the changes

To accommodate future enhancements in different directions (in rough order of
importance):

1. test bench for all parts of our language technology efforts
    1. test bench enhanced, but not yet complete
1. improve Forrest i18n support with static sites
1. reorganise the documentation:
    1. differ between target groups
    1. get better grouping
    1. decide what to write in Forrest and what in wiki
   (cf. [Apertium](http://www.apertium.org/) and
   [http://xixona.dlsi.ua.es/apertium/]) for a similar split)
    1. update/add missing parts
1. migrate lexc lexicons to XML, splitting the task
    1. Name lexica (the Name project)
    1. Dictionaries (already in XML, task is to integrate them)
    1. At least migrate the lexc open POSes (Komi as a pilot case)
1. change the look of the documentation web
1. corpus content moved to Max Planck repositories? Norsk språkbank?
1. update infrastructure to allow content-restricted spellers for special target
  groups

**TODO:**
* make the new SL Server services functional: (**Børre**)
    - group calendars
* set up corpus mirroring on the XServe again (**Børre**)
* finish the restructuring  and cleaning of the `script/` directory
  **Ciprian**)
* infrastructure remake: (**Børre, Ciprian, Sjur, Tomi, Trond**)
    - more modularised make / build infra (prepare for smn, sms, sjd, others)
        - look at omorfi for ideas of how to modularise
    - merge gt, kt and st into one
    - modularised preprocess and spellrelax
    - alternatives to make:
        - [SCons](http://www.scons.org/)
        - [makepp](http://makepp.sourceforge.net/)
        - [Maven](http://maven.apache.org/) (for java-projects)
        - [CMake](http://www.cmake.org/) - **Sjur** looked at it, and have started to
    experiment
* make a test-all target that runs all tests we have (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
    - delayed until we have restructured the make/build process
* define and document testing routines (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
    - delayed until we have restructured the make/build process

# Linguistics

## North Sámi

There are a lot of hyphens found in noun paradigms. They should not be there.
Trond and Thomas will look into them.

**TODO:**
* check extra hyphens in the sme lexc continuations (**Thomas, Trond**)

## Lule Sámi

**TODO:**
* check extra hyphens in the smj lexc continuations (**Thomas, Trond**)

## South Sámi

**TODO:**
* read through and comment by Wednesday afternoon (**Sjur**)
* adjectives (**Maja** with **Thomas, Trond, Sjur**)
    - two competing naming conventions of continuation lexicons
        - One naming goes ATTRSUFF-PREDSUFF-STEMTYPE
        - One follows the `sme` convention of naming key adjectives
        - There are duplicate lexica
    - The comparative issue open here and there
        - The ATTRSUFF-PREDSUFF-STEMTYPE lexica now go to EVENCOMP and
    ODDCOMP only.
* finish compound tags for adjectives (**Maja**)

# Name lexicon/risten.no infrastructure

**TODO:**
* find already approved lists, in paper or electronic form (**term team**)
* convert paper lists to electronic lists (**term team**)
* convert lists to standard XML (**Sjur, Tomi**)
* add prepared lists to risten.no (**Sjur, Tomi**)
* fix i18n bug in risten.no/G5 (so they will work without the proper locale
  request) (**Sjur**)
* fix bugs in lexc2xml; add comments to the log element (**Saara**)
* finish first version of the editing (**Sjur**)
* test editing of the xml files. If ok, then: (**Sjur, Thomas, Trond**)
* make terms-smX.xml <=== automatically from propernoun-sme-lex.xml (add
  `nob` as well) (the morphological section should be kept intact, in e.g.
  propernoun-sme-morph.txt) (**Sjur, Saara**)
* convert propernoun-($lang)-lex.txt to a derived file from common xml files
  (**Sjur, Tomi, Saara**)
* implement data synchronisation between [risten.no](http://www.risten.no) and
  the cvs repo, and possibly other servers (ie the G5 as an alternative server
  to the public risten.no - it might be faster and better suited than the
  official one; also local installations could be treated the same way)
* start to use the xml file as source file
* clean terms-sme.xml such that all names have the correct tag for their use
  (e.g. @type=secondary) (**Thomas, linguists**)
* merge placenames which are errouneously in different entries: e.g. Helsinki,
  Helsingfors, Helsset (**linguists**)
* publish the name lexicon on risten.no (**Sjur**)
* add missing parallel names for placenames (**linguists**)
* add informative links between first names like Niillas and Nils
  (**linguists**)

## Dictionaries

**Ciprian** has made an intelligent version without XML, to be used with A-ITE
and its StarDict component. Seems to work ok, but needs more testing.

StarDict is useless for Cyrillic languages, mainly because of the scanning
function (ie point and look-up). We need to find an alternative to StarDict.
Also, the Kildin Sámi users have different needs than we have had in mind. And
they don't have access to a Kildin Sámi keyboard in Windows.

* we need a Russian Windows machine, bought in Russia, using the software they
  use
* we also of course need a western/Norwegian Windows machine for testing

Released:
* SME:NOB update release

Other things dictionary-related:
* risten.no data as part of our dictionaries
* dictionaries as part of risten.no
* dictionaries and risten.no as part of Autshumato ITE

**TODO:**
* kom:fin-eng
    - moved the original kom-lex.xml to the inc-dir and froze it
    - split it by pos into the working_file dir, the ONLY place to work with
   the dictionary entries
    - now, the lexC files are generated via XSLT sheets, no perl scripts
    - adjusted the Makefile
    - prepared the pipeline for compiling the mac dict
    - todo: make a pipeline for StarDict also (as far as I know, **Jaska** has)
   a Linux machine
* set up risten.no on eXist/XServe (as a beta version site) (**Sjur**)
* set up required infra for smenob on risten.no/XServe (**Sjur**)
* Continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
* end user documentation (how to download and install) (**Ciprian, Trond**)
* Contact *Davvi Girji* about cooperation on electronic dictionaries
  (**Sjur**)
* developing the mobile phone version of smenob:
    - [http://pfed.info/wksite/]
* Komi
    - take out the doublets to a separate file (**Ciprian**)
    - merge the doublets (**Jaska, Trond**)
    - Completing the automaton to some state (**Trond, Jaska, Paula**)
* make the sort XSL script available for all languages to keep the source files
  sorted

# Proofing tools

Spelling feedback from Malta:
* use FST to model suggestions (Krister et al)
* Lene is evaluating the output of the Polderland speller
    - first-letter errors rare, but the PLX speller still changes it quite often
    - Oahpa and Divvun approaching each other
* using Wikipedia as a source for spelling errors and test material (a French
  group has made a setup of tools to automatise most of this)

## South Sámi

Beta release: Aug 25. Contract now ok by Knowledge Concepts. Suggested timetable
sent this morning.

There are no goldstandard files in the correct location in the corpus
repository. This needs to be fixed before we start testing the `sma` speller.

**TODO:**
* fix goldstandard files (location) (**Maja, Sjur, Thomas**)
    - free documents: `$FREECORP/goldstandard/orig/sma`
    - bound documents: `$BOUNDCORP/goldstandard/orig/sma`
* test conversion to xml to ensure there are no markup errors
  (**Maja, Sjur, Thomas**)
* test the `sma` speller on the gold standard document (**Sjur**)
* difftest for fst and PL speller (**Sjur**)
* External beta testers:
    - David
    - Jovsset
    - the Røros group

## HFST- and Voikko-based proofing tools

**Sjur** met with the HFST people yesterday. Two things happening in parallell:
1. hfst3 - being made ready for public release, with proper inclusion of
          autotools, and updated documentation
1. speller/lookup library:
    1. speller/lookup library
    1. voikko integration of this library

**TODO:**
* Change the license tag to GPL for voikko inclusion. (see above)
    - done
* run tests using Hunspell, Voikko, Polderland for our Sámi lexicons
  (**Sjur, Tomi**)
* check out the voikko code, see [this page
| https://sourceforge.net/apps/trac/voikko/wiki/libvoikko/IntegrationTesting]
  (**Tomi**)
* try to compile it (development is done on Linux, no MacOS X testing so far)
  (**Tomi**)
* add voikko support to our proofing test bench (**Sjur**)
* add all our Sámi analysers and test them as spellers (**Tomi, Sjur**)

## Speller bugs

List of bugs returned from Polderland:
* 621
* 630
* 652
* 656
* 676

Tag reordering for abbreviations have caused a lot of problems:

```
smj:
hr.
hr.	hr+ABBR+Acc
cand.philol.
cand.philol.	cand.philol+ABBR+N+Acc
Per
Per	Per+N+Prop+Mal+Sg+Attr

sme:
hr.
hr.	hr+N+ABBR+Acc
Per
Per	Per+N+Prop+Mal+Sg+Attr
```

Open issues based on test results:

### sme
Version: **Davvisámi, version 1.2, 2009-09-18**
* 399 - missing numerals (plural forms) - still **OPEN**
* 425 - X not recognised; single letters were left out - still **OPEN**
* 435 - roman numbers - inflection of single letter numbers
        rejected, as well as some complex numbers (but is ok in `smj`) -
        still **OPEN**
    - we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
        separate lexicon file
* 461 - **REGRESSION:** missing suggestion (sáhkki)
* 508 - **REGRESSION:** accepts smj entries (most likely abbreviation missing)
* 520 - **REGRESSION:** r9 and š9 not defined (abbr. missing)
* 595 - prefix+name without hyphen (*ovdaLot* instead of *ovda-Lot*) -
        still **OPEN**
* 603 - suomabealdi accepted - still **OPEN**
* 606 - compound-tags LEXICON VUOHTA - still **OPEN**
* 613 - short gen. as second compound part - still **OPEN**
* 619 - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails - *vihttasoarttat*
        remaining - still **OPEN**
* 629 - *a* taking part in compounding without hyphen - still **OPEN**
    - only open case has word *A-finálaid* compounded
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still **OPEN**, open case has uppercase letters
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still **OPEN**
* 661 - **REGRESSION:** abbr. not recognized
* 709 - sámedikkeválga accepted - **OPEN**
* 728 - vowel shortening GenCmp+Left-tagged - still **OPEN**
* 779 - caseforms of pronoun okatahat - still **OPEN**
* 785 - does not recognize alphabet-abbr+noun - **OPEN**
* 802 - **NEW:** multiword propernouns
* 803 - **NEW:** FINJU- words accepted single-handed
* 804 - **NEW:** guovttilogát, njealjilogát
* 805 - **NEW:** Nouns+acronyms

### smj
Version: **Julevsáme, version 1.2, 2009-09-20**
* 435 - roman number - single letter numbers now recognised
    -      we should pre-generate all numbers once and for all, and store them in
        a separate lexicon file
    -      please note that *inflection* of single letter numerals is **fine**
        in `smj`, as opposed to `sme`
* 482 - *polardutkamin* not recognized - **FIXED**
* 496 - **REGRESSION:** unrecognised clitics
* 556 - non-existent word accepted - **FIXED**
* 594 - *lågenanguoktáj* not recognized - still **OPEN**
* 595 - **REGRESSION:** prefix+name as split comp without hyphen
* 596 - C-giellan is not accepted - still **OPEN**
* 600 - Gen+hyph compound - **FIXED**
* 627 - prefix + hyhpen does not get accepted - **FIXED**
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still **OPEN**, open case has uppercase letters
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still **OPEN**
* 650 - **REGRESSION:** noun prefix+name compound without hyphen
* 652 - UPPERCASE-typos only get acronym-suggestions - still **OPEN**
* 692 - numeral-variants - all but one fixed (*gáktsalågenantjuotakta*), but
        still **OPEN**
* 744 - **REGRESSION:** numerals + clitic
* 803 - **NEW:** VINJU- words accepted single-handed
* 805 - **NEW:** Nouns+acronyms

**TODO:**
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion (**Tomi**)

## Hyphenator bugs

Open issues based on test results :

### sme
Lexicon version: **Davvisámi, version 1.2, 2009-09-18**

No known issues!

### smj
Lexicon version: **Julevsáme, version 1.2, 2009-09-20**
* 670 - Hard hyphen replaced with soft hyphen: *10-biejvvásattja* (the word
        is not rec.; Bug #711) - still **OPEN**

### sma

Command to test the hyphenator:

```
preprocess dev/corp/pressemelding.txt | lookup bin/hyph-sma.fst | cut -f2 | \
lookup bin/hyphrules-sma.fst | grep -v '^$' | cut -f2 | uniq | see
```

**TODO:**
* fix PL hyphenator errors (**Tomi**)
    - almost done - one `smj` bug left

## Installer changes

**TODO:**
* test InDesign installer (**Sjur**)

## User documentation

**TODO:**
* InDesign documentation (**Sjur**)
    - Norwegian translation received from Davvi Girji

## 1.2 release

Content:
* several smj bug fixes
* lexicalisations
* InDesign Mac & Win
* new OOo beta
* improved installers, at least for Mac, preferably also for Windows

## 2.0 release

Content:
* official `sma` proofing tools release

# Nordplus Språk proofing test bench project

Arno Teigseth is hired for the summer. He is sitting in Equador, 7 hours after
Norway. He is working with a quechua speller (using hunspell) and dictionary.

A goal is to use texts from parallel domains, in order to be
able to compare nob and sme. We start out with 100000 words, 5000
for each genre:
1. Discussion fora on the net
1. Blogs

Discussion fora can be problematic, as they contain a lot of very oral language
with deliberate oral or dialectal forms used in the text. As such, the texts
won't be typical for the kind of texts people would like to spell-check, and
thus the genre is problematic for the purpose at hand.

Possible other genres:
1. Minutes from local associations
1. Pupil texts - look for the home pages of the schools
1. exam texts by 10th grade pupils, where the pupils have published the texts
  themselves
1. skrivebua - Nordland fylkeskommune: all three Sámi languages

# Text to speech

There will be regular meetings in this project from now on, every second week.

**TODO:**
* put together the preprocessing transducers and scripts (**Tomi**)
* refine syntax / dependency rules (**Biret Ánne**)
* continue public tender process (**Sjur**)

# Machine Translation

Background:

Kevin will work on smenob until mid August, Ryan on finsme this summer.
We hope to have a student working one month on smesmj this summer.
The world now knows (vaguely) that we work on MT, so we should do, as well.
We also need to work together with the external ones.

## All languages

**TODO**

* Set up hfst and apertium for all relevant machines
* Improve the sme-dis for MT purposes
* Go through the bilingual transfer lexica for more general translations
* Add alternative translations and selection rules
* Arrange an Apertium seminar (later)
* transfer hfst build infra from Apertium to Giellatekno

## finsme

Needed: Tag unification and lexicon completion. Grammatical transfer rules

There are two different issues:
* Trivial tagging differences
    - Ind or not
* Different linguistic analyses
    - fin: Adp, sme: Po and Pr



**TODO**
* Tag unification
* Adp split in fin (**Trond**)

## smenob

Needed: Lexicon completion. Grammatical transfer rules

## smesmj

New worker underway.

## smesma

Infrastructure in place, to demo in Trondheim to encourage more work and
projects.

# CAT

**Ciprian** has made an intelligent version of smenob in text format, for use
with A-ITE. **Lene** would like to have an intelligent version of risten.no in
the nobsme direction. **Lene** would like to have a script for making
translation memory xml-files from bilingual texts.

**TODO:**
* make intelligent nobsme risten.no - requires `nob` morphology
    - nob.fst a la Trond
    - norskordbank.fst
    - nob.fst based on an xml source synchronised with Ordbanken source texts
    - should be coordinated with the Apertium analyser
* write a TM script to turn a parallell corpus into TM entries
    - testing A-ITE on Norwegian Windows

# SMA seminar in August/September

* Place: Trondheim
* Date: 30.8.-3.9.

Theme:
* editing dictionaries
* beta tools for `sma`
* orthographic questions

**TODO:**
* find rooms (univ.) (**Inger Johansen, Maja**)
    - make sure we have rooms booked
    - book lunch, coffee
* write inv. letter (**Maja**)
    - done
* send letter (**Maja**)
    - done
* make a list of participants in `$GTPRIV/` (**Maja**)
* call a select few that have not answered but that we want there (**Maja**)
* preparations:
    - test installation of all needed software (**Ciprian, Børre**)
    - test XMLEditor on Windows, including plugin installation
   (**Ciprian, Børre**)
    - test svn checkout and patch creation on Windows, using a GUI client
   (**Ciprian, Børre**)
    - try to work out a unified DTD for dictionaries and Oahpa (or augment the
   general dictionary DTD with Oahpa-required features) (**Ciprian**)
    - sma Divvun beta - see above
    - presentations - to be assigned next week

# Other

## Start to make yearly reports

**TODO**
* Set up a catalogue in plan/ (**Trond**)

## Thursday inhouse seminar

Next time suggestion list:
1. introduction to xslt - **Ciprian** to start out
    1.  relevant xslt issues:
    1.  basic principles of xslt …
    1.  sorting in xslt … (have a look at the dictionary sort xslt script)
    1.  converting from one xml format to another wilt xslt (sugg: convert from
    DivvunGT dictionary dtd to MacDict xml)

Future seminars:
1. XQuery
1. More XML (needs concretisation)
1. UML
1. other suggestions?

## Summer planning

Topics:

* speller test project -> Sjur, Børre, Thomas, X
* speech synthesis -> Sjur, Trond, BA as a starter
* risten.no -> Ciprian, Sjur, Tomi
* Barents project follow-up meeting -> Trond, Sjur
* sme and smj proofing tools, next version -> Thomas, Tomi, Sjur
* HFST-based proofing tools -> Sjur
* MT terminology project -> Trond, Linda, Fran, Kevin
* HSL centre status -> Trond

Dates:

* August: IceTAL, Reykjavik - Linda, Francis
* `sma` seminar in Trondheim: Lexicography, Oahpa, Divvun2 beta
* September 8: Konvens-workshop Saarbrücken: LT and text-technological methods
  for e-learning http://konvens2010.de/workshop_en.html:
    - Lene will try to get an abstract accepted, acceptance 6.7

## Summer vacations

|   Name   | Dates
| --- | ---
|  Børre   | 28/6-11/7, 2/8-15/8
|  Ciprian | 4 Weeks ??? to Finish and Kárášjohka Sápmi in the week 26.7-1.8, and to Gáivuotna between 12-25.7
|  Maja    | 09.07.-09.08 (4 uker)
|  Sjur    | 12/7-8/8
|  Thom    | 21/6-23/7
|  Tomi    | 5 (non-contiguous) weeks between 21/6-13/8
|  Trond   | 4 weeks between 5.7.-9.8. (?)
|  Lene    | 21-25.6 + 4 weeks between 12.7-15.8

# Next meeting, closing

The next meeting is 16.8.2010, 09:30 Norwegian time.

The meeting was closed at 12:00.

# Appendix - task lists for the next week

## Boerre

* get all the latest Sámi Parliament protocolls into our repository
* contact the Sámi translators at the government and ministeries to get more
  parallell texts
* make the conversion scripts work with the new svn repository
    - upload dir
    - goldstandard dir
    - is svg conversion working?
* corpus access on the XServe
* turn on corpus summary crontab
* implement language switch for static divvun site
* improve XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Draw document
* get translations of thank-you letter
* make the new SL Server services functional:
    - group calendars
* set up corpus mirroring on the XServe again
* give Maja a WEbSak intro
* add checkout of the free corpus to the gtsetup.sh script
* add checkout of the bound corpus when on victorio
* `sma` seminar in August/September:
    - test installation of all needed software
    - test XMLEditor on Windows, including plugin installation
    - test svn checkout and patch creation on Windows, using a GUI client
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Ciprian

* `sma` seminar in August/September:
    - test installation of all needed software
    - test XMLEditor on Windows, including plugin installation
    - test svn GUI client on Windows
    - augment the  dictionary DTD with oahpa features and requirements
    - setup a sma-oahpa on victorio
    - build a preliminary data set for sma-Leksa (based on the DTD)
* Skolt-Oahpa:
    - fine tuning of semantic tags
    - finish localization
* terminology:
    - merged the 2 doc files with the xls file containing the 2006 law terminology
   db
    - prepare a StarDict test version of the merged data for demo
    - compile a dictionary in StarDict format with all data featuring the
   properties wished by Ellen Ravna
* add license header to all files
* PhD-Projektbeskrivelse (internal deadline end of June 2010):
    - search, read, write (execute): high priority!
* read and answer the newsgroups messages
* update corpora (both monolingual and parallel) for Oslo (Glossa)
    - check the correctness of parallelity between sme and nob files
    - sentence-align sme with nob: fix tca2 problem
    - analyse/disambiguate: todo -- waiting for the last version of FSTs
* corpus infra:
    - check the conversion from old rcs corpus repository to new svn-based
    - make the conversion scripts work with the new svn repository
        - add check for almost empty content
        - add processing of svg files
    - reorganise subdirs as needed
* infrastructure
    - test cwb
    - continue with restructuring and cleaning the script catalogue as suggested
   in the newsgroup
    - transform sme-lexC files into XML format
    - make a schema/dtd description of the lexC-file (experiment with
   Komi and Romanian)
* GT web:
    - add a tree visualizer for the dependency trees
    - add input help for special characters on the tool sites
    - automatise the web statistics
    - filter (English, German, etc.) input using language detection tools
    - put a note on the sites that these are NOT MT tools
    - input help for generating wordforms (dropdown menus).
* Sandbox Oahpa:
    - integrate reCAPTCHA into Django (as **Lene** suggested)
    - debug the installed sb_oahpa
    - update and correct the Oapha docu site
* Running Oahpa:
    - implement a testbench for Vasta (as **Lene** needs)
    - integrate reCAPTCHA after the SB-test
    - add an Oahpa clock and date excercise (cf. Numra)
    - email notification when the server goes down
    - check the XXX?
* Sjd/Kom/Sms/Etc-Oahpa
    - try to implement and embed virtual keyboards for each specific Oahpa
    - try to learn something about compiling keyboard in general
* dictionaries, generally:
    - synchronize the source language entries from a specific dictionary with the
   entries in the morphology component (now especially for sma):
   that means nothing then put the entries from dict that are NOT analyzed
   into the lexC files
    - the StarDict on Windows: try the HTML-plugin (that means that users can use
   StarDict 3.2)
    - try to reduce the dict-size on mac: experiment with xPointer, etc.
* Fkv:Nob - Nob:Fkv:
    - incorporate novel glossary into the dict
    - try to implement a web version of the dictionaries in HTML
* KomEngFin:
    - test the automatic sorting by Komi alphabet in xsl (as discussed
   with **Trond**)
* SmeNob:
    - incorporate the passives into the last version of the sme:nob
    - start a new compilation of SmeNob and improve it based on the experience
   gained with SmaNob
* SmaNobSwe:
    - extend the smanobswe dictionary: waiting for data (incorporate the data from
   Maja-Lisa)
* SjdRus:
    - continue the work at the Kildin-Russian dictionary, next internal deadline
   is after finishing the PhD project description
* Lexicon workshop
    - contact Kimberly Mäkäräinen and ask whether she might be willing to share
   data with us
* MT
    - test A-ITE on Windows
* Permanent education
    - prepare/update XLS course materials
    - learn UML

## Maja

* more work on `sma` adjectives
* look at incoming loanwords
* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts
* finish compound tags for adjectives
* Rette goldstandard doc - så mange som mulig - high prio! - min. 1000 (helst
  5000) ord løpende tekst
* find rooms (univ.)
    - make sure we have rooms booked
    - book lunch, coffee
* make a list of participants in `$GTPRIV/`
* call a select few that have not answered but that we want there
* fix goldstandard files (location)
    - free documents: `$FREECORP/goldstandard/orig/sma`
    - bound documents: `$BOUNDCORP/goldstandard/orig/sma`
* test conversion to xml to ensure there are no markup errors
* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts
    - get `sma` articles in Š-bláđđi
    - the Gun Utsi book is almost there - one contract missing
* Corpus gathering:
    - contact Inga Margrethe Bjørn Eira (**Maja**)
    - restart the letter mailing thing using WebSak (**Maja**)
* adjectives
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Sjur

* add checkout of the free corpus to the gtsetup.sh script
* add checkout of the bound corpus when on victorio
* fix goldstandard files (location)
* test the `sma` speller on the gold standard document
* add voikko support to our proofing test bench
* add all our Sámi analysers and test them as spellers
* run tests using Hunspell, Voikko, Polderland for our Sámi lexicons
* install & configure the Unison news reader
* difftest for fst and PL speller
* Northern areas
    - plan a meeting/seminar in Tromsø
    - make a plan for the first two years, update overall plan
* @TTS: continue public tender process
* make **Leif Åge** send out CD's to distribution points
* contintue Nordplus Sprog project
* Write a formal letter to *Davvi girji* about electronic dictionaries
* make XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
* name db/risten.no
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
* find and contact the correct person in SD, to get the manuscript for all Sámi
  teaching material now being given out to the schools
* when the new build infrastructure works as it should, delete the old ones
* test the new build commands and their fst's: `make NEW-fst TARGET=sme` etc.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Thomas
* test the new build commands and their fst's: `make NEW-fst TARGET=sme` etc.
* check extra hyphens in the lexc continuations with Trond
* check for a new computer
* fix goldstandard files (location)
* test conversion to xml to ensure there are no markup errors
* prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
* Digitalize south saami books
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Tomi
* run tests using Hunspell, Voikko, Polderland for our Sámi lexicons
* put together the TTS preprocessing transducers and scripts
* try to compile voikko
* add all our Sámi analysers and test them as spellers
* when the new build infrastructure works as it should, delete the old ones
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
* fix double hyphen bugs
* fix PL `smj` hyphenator bug
* fix PL conversion bugs
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond

* check extra hyphens in the lexc continuations with Thomas
* Course plan for Barents meeting/seminar, october. Financing must be in place.
* Northern areas
    - plan a meeting/seminar in Tromsø
    - make a plan for the first two years, update overall plan
* MT/Terminology
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
