# Meeting setup

* Date: 13.9.2010
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Internet
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat

# Agenda

Cf. one of the following, depending on context:
* the upper bar of the SEE window (provided you use the JSPWiki syntax mode)
* the TOC in Forrest-rendered output, like HTML and PDF

# Opening, agenda review, participants

* Opened at 10:01.
* Present: **Børre, Ciprian, Maja, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi, Trond**
* Absent: **none**
* Agenda accepted as is

# Updated task status since last meeting

## Børre
* get the 2006-2010 Sámi Parliament protocolls into our repository
    - nothing new since last week
* find and contact the correct person in SD, to get the manuscript for all Sámi
  teaching material now being given out to the schools
    - not done
* fix the upload script after the corpus infra remake
    - not done
* forrest makeover:
    - make the site build again
    - upgrade all forrest installations, so we are all using the same baseline
    - make the readme files for the proofing tools functional again
        - not done
* test `convert2xml.pl`, especially on victorio
    - done
* contact the Sámi translators at the government and ministeries to get more
  parallell texts
    - not done
* turn on corpus summary crontab
    - not done
* add updates of free & bound to the svnup alias
    - free added
* implement language switch for static divvun site
    - not done
* improve XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Draw document
    - not done
* get translations of thank-you letter
    - not done
* make the new SL Server services functional:
    - group calendars
        - not done
* add checkout of the free corpus to the gtsetup.sh script
    - done
* add checkout of the bound corpus when on victorio
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - fixed http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=871
* other
    - Did some brief testing of 
   [mumble](http://mumble.sourceforge.net/FAQ#What_is_Mumble.3F), to see if we
   can use it when cooperating with the people we met in Trondheim. Mumble 
   consists of a server and a client part. Both the server and client are
   available on Mac, Windows and Linux.

## Ciprian
* update the XXE configuration to include the oahpa additions
* 'Nachwehen' of the Sma-lex Workshop:
    - xml-ize all data from the Excel, Word, etc. files received from the different participants
    - enrich the data for the duodje terminology for users' need
        - todo
* Kildin-Oahpa (deadline 13. September 2010):
    - add/correct Leksa entries
        - done in online dict
    - fix the localization bug (the sjd text doesn't show up)
        - todo
    - try to find a solution for the character input (virtual keyboard)
        - done
        - started to implement a konversion routine for sjd
        - improved input of special characters in the online dict
* online dictionaries:
    - check with all combinations browser:Operating System and if problems try to mend them
        - done for Chrome, Firefox, Safari, Camino on Mac and Chrome, Firefox, IE, Safari on virtual Windows
    - compile the Kildin<->Russian for the lightweight dictionary solution (online gt dictionaries)
        - done
* fitswe: check verbs from the csv-files and if needed put them into the xml format
    - todo
* Skolt-Oahpa:
    - fine tuning of semantic tags
    - finish localization
        - todo
* terminology:
    - merged the 2 doc files with the xls file containing the 2006 law terminology
   db
    - prepare a StarDict test version of the merged data for demo
    - compile a dictionary in StarDict format with all data featuring the
   properties wished by Ellen Ravna 
        - low priority: according to Ellen Ravna, the justerm db work will restart 2011
* add license header to all files
    - ongoing
* PhD-Projektbeskrivelse (internal deadline end of September 2010):
    - search, read, write (execute): high priority!
        - todo
* update corpora (both monolingual and parallel) for Oslo (Glossa)
    - check the correctness of parallelity between sme and nob files
    - sentence-align sme with nob: fix tca2 problem or search for a working solution (a different aligner)
    - analyse/disambiguate: todo -- waiting for the last version of FSTs
* corpus infra:
    - check the conversion from old rcs corpus repository to new svn-based
    - make the conversion scripts work with the new svn repository
        - add check for almost empty content
        - add processing of svg files
        - todo for all corpus issues
* infrastructure
    - test cwb
    - continue with restructuring and cleaning the script catalogue as suggested
   in the newsgroup
    - transform sme-lexC files into XML format
    - make a schema/dtd description of the lexC-file (experiment with
   Komi and Romanian)
        - todo
* GT web:
    - add a tree visualizer for the dependency trees
    - add input help for special characters on the tool sites
        - done for onnline dict sjdrus
    - automatise the web statistics
    - filter (English, German, etc.) input using language detection tools
    - put a note on the sites that these are NOT MT tools
    - input help for generating wordforms (dropdown menus).
        - todo
* Sandbox Oahpa:
    - integrate reCAPTCHA into Django (as **Lene** suggested)
    - debug the installed sb_oahpa
    - update and correct the Oapha docu site
        - todo
* Running Oahpa:
    - implement a testbench for Vasta (as **Lene** needs)
    - integrate reCAPTCHA after the SB-test
    - add an Oahpa clock and date excercise (cf. Numra)
    - email notification when the server goes down
        - done: server gets restarted every morning at 5 a.m.
    - check the XXX?
        - todo
* Sjd/Kom/Sms/Etc-Oahpa
    - try to implement and embed virtual keyboards for each specific Oahpa
    - try to learn something about compiling keyboard in general
        - done for sjdrus
* dictionaries, generally:
    - synchronize the source language entries from a specific dictionary with the 
   entries in the morphology component (now especially for sma):
   that means nothing then put the entries from dict that are NOT analyzed
   into the lexC files
    - the StarDict on Windows: try the HTML-plugin (that means that users can use
   StarDict 3.2)
    - try to reduce the dict-size on mac: experiment with xPointer, etc.
        - todo
* Fkv:Nob - Nob:Fkv:
    - incorporate novel glossary into the dict
        - todo
* KomEngFin:
    - test the automatic sorting by Komi alphabet in xsl (as discussed
   with **Trond**)
        - todo
* SmeNob:
    - incorporate the passives into the last version of the sme:nob
    - start a new compilation of SmeNob and improve it based on the experience
   gained with SmaNob
        - todo: high priority (however, waiting for **Trond**)
* SmaNobSwe:
    - extend the smanobswe dictionary: waiting for data (incorporate the data from
   Maja-Lisa)
        - still waiting for Maja-Lisa's data
* SjdRus:
    - continue the work at the Kildin-Russian dictionary, next internal deadline
   is after finishing the PhD project description
* MT
    - test A-ITE on Windows
        - todo

## Maja
* send out an e-mail to the Trondheim seminar participants containing summary
  and communication instructions
    - not done (**Sjur** did)
* more work on `sma` adjectives
    - ongoing
* go through the lexicon and add for all loan words a form corresponding to the
  suggestion from Ove Lorentz (other forms should be SUB-marked)
    - ongoing - big work!
* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts
    - ongoing
* finish compound tags for adjectives
    - ongoing - contemporary as the loanwords
* Rette goldstandard doc - så mange som mulig - high prio! - min. 1000 (helst
  5000) ord løpende tekst
    - not prio right now
* test conversion to xml to ensure there are no markup errors in goldstandards
    - not done yet
* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts
    - ongoing
    - get `sma` articles in Š-bláđđi
    - the Gun Utsi book is almost there - one contract missing
        - Not done
* Corpus gathering: 
    - contact Inga Margrethe Bjørn Eira
        - not done yet
    - follow up the yearbook-articles
        - has talked to the authors, and they were all positive. But contracts are
    missing.
    - restart the letter mailing thing using WebSak
        - not done
* adjectives
    - working on it when I´m working with the loanwords - contemporary as the
   loanwords
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - not done

## Sjur
* update the XXE configuration to include the oahpa additions
    - not done
* write a summary of the Friday discussion
    - done
* set up communication routines: GoogleTalk, Skype
    - done
* write sma beta readme file
    - not done
* forrest makeover:
    - make the site build again
    - upgrade all forrest installations, so we are all using the same baseline
    - make the readme files for the proofing tools functional again
* convert M4 twolc processing to transducer manipulation
* test `convert2xml.pl`, especially on victorio
* add checkout of the free corpus to the gtsetup.sh script
* add checkout of the bound corpus when on victorio
* add voikko support to our proofing test bench
* add all our Sámi analysers to voikko and test them as spellers
* run tests using Hunspell, Voikko, Polderland for our Sámi lexicons
* difftest for fst and PL speller
* Northern areas
    - plan a meeting/seminar in Tromsø
    - make a plan for the first two years, update overall plan
* @TTS: continue public tender process
* make **Leif Åge** send out CD's to distribution points
* contintue Nordplus Sprog project
* make XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
* other things:
    - tested Autshumato especially on Windows
    - meeting regardind wiki/forum site for sma-lex, new site established
    - hfst-ospell testing and updating

## Thomas
* go through sma loanwords and change according to Trondheim findings
    - worked
* write sma readme file
    - not done
* check extra hyphens in the lexc continuations with Trond
    - looked into it very briefly
* Digitalize south saami books
    - nothing this week
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - some work done

## Tomi
* run tests using Hunspell, Voikko, Polderland for our Sámi lexicons
    - not done
* put together the TTS preprocessing transducers and scripts
    - not done
* try to compile voikko
    - worked with, but Voikko didn't compile
* add all our Sámi analysers and test them as spellers
    - not done
* convert M4 twolc processing to transducer manipulation
    - looked into this one
* write sma beta readme file
    - not done
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
    - not done
* fix double hyphen bugs
* fix PL `smj` hyphenator bug
* fix PL conversion bugs
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond
* check extra hyphens in the lexc continuations with Thomas
    - Not done
* Course plan for Barents meeting/seminar, october. Financing must be in place.
    - Not done
    - check the time needed to tet visas with the UiT admin
        - Not done
    - call the ministry
        - Done
    - plan a meeting/seminar in Tromsø
        - Awaiting conclusion
    - make a plan for the first two years, update overall plan
        - Not done.
* MT/Terminology
    - Done updates on MT, nothing on terminology
* sma-oahpa: text analysis and setup of basic vocabulary
    - Trondheim week for this.
* Follow up the issue of Windows test machines with IT dept
    - Done, 2 of 3 machines (XP, Vista) are installed, we still are waiting
   for the W7 machine, but I will pick them up.
* New corpus interface for Oslo (with Ciprian)
    - Not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
    - Oh, yes.

# Oahpa!

**Lene** worked with the Røros people on the semantic sets in the Sma-Oahpa.
The data is being updated in csv format and **Cip** will transform it in XML

**TODO**
* From the start: sjd_oahpa Leksa in deu and eng as well (**Ciprian**)
* improve sjdoahpa (deadline 13. September 2010)  (**Ciprian**):
    - add/correct Leksa entries
    - fix the localization bug (the sjd text doesn't show up)
    - delayed
* sma-oahpa: 
    - Analyse texts from Røros, check against dictionary (**Trond**)
        - done
    - Mark curriculum words from candidate list, in the smanob dictionary
   (**Ciprian**)
    - Work on the list (**Røros**)
        - Røros gang has started working
* clock and date for Numra (**Ciprian**)
* activate numra for Skolt Sámi (**Ciprian**)
    - sms-num.fst is ok, checked with native speaker, and in use.
        - done
* add Captcha for the feedback e-mail address (**Ciprian**)

# Corpus gathering

National Library: there is a meeting September 23, to which Trond and Sjur are
going. Trond will request a couple of Sámi OCR-ed texts (together with the
`nob` texts we already have), and use them as test cases for spell-checking
and (automatically) correcting the OCR-ed texts.

**Børre** has continued setting up automatic harvesting of SD texts, and is looking into the same for [http://regjeringen.no].

**TODO:**
* get the 2006-2010 Sámi Parliament protocolls into our repository (**Børre**)
* contact the Sámi translators at the government and ministeries to get more
  parallell texts (**Børre**)
* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts (**Maja**)
    - get `sma` articles in Š-bláđđi
    - the Gun Utsi book is almost there - one contract missing (**Maja**)
* send a copy of the signed contracts back to the authors, translators and 
  publishers, accompanied by the thank-you letter
* find and contact the correct person in SD, to get the manuscript for all Sámi
  teaching material now being given out to the schools (**Børre**)
* get the `sma` yearbooks from *Saemien sïjhte* (**Maja**)
* contact Inga Margrethe Bjørn Eira (**Maja**)
* give Maja a WebSak intro (**Børre**)
* restart the letter mailing thing using WebSak (**Maja**)

# Promoting Divvun

**TODO:**
* make leaflet to inform about the project (**Børre**)
    - add InDesign text (**Sjur**)
    - make XSL script to transform Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
   (**Børre, Sjur**)
* distribute CD version through the library bus, the language centres and
  common sami centres in all of Sápmi. Gaaltije in Östersund for example.
  (**Leif Åge, Sjur**)
    - make him send out CD's accordingly (**Sjur**)
* update online download log statistics page (**Børre**)
* make an info campaign about our language technology products and services
  (financed by the Sámi Parliament) - send out people that travel around and
  demonstrate and inform about our tools etc.

# Future plans, directions and ideas

See a separate document in `plan/strat/5year.jspwiki`.

## Northern areas project

First major obstacle: make working keyboards and fonts.
In principle, there are two approaches to keyboards:

1. Make the Russian-based keyboards work
1. Design new Kildin-optimized keyboards

The first goal has priority. We should have text analysis in order to consider
whether the second goal is feasible. Trond to follow up test machines.

* Choice of fonts
* Rendering of fonts in MS Word and other important programs
* Keyboard layout
    - Empirical phase: What keyboards are around
    - Design phase: Make the optimal keyboards -- for all OSes

Write trustworthy and detailed documentation (in Russian)

What we know:
* you can type on some computers (Michael R: it works), not on others. Q: what
  are the differences between the two types of computers?
* some fonts can't display the chars, others can (but usually ugly)

**TODO:**
* Course plan for meeting/seminar, october. Financing must be in place.
    - check the time needed to tet visas with the UiT admin (**Trond**)
    - call the ministry (**Trond**)
* Attend a beginners' course in Russian (priority: the alphabet!) near you..
* make a plan for the first two years, update overall plan (**Trond, Sjur**)
* Follow up Windows test machines

# Infrastructure

Out of the box experiences:
* fao could not be compiled out of the box (the Oslo gang tried) because of a
  missing `tmp` dir
    - is easily resolved by a `mkdir -p` command in the make files
* our list of software to install is incomplete or lacking installation
  instructions
* external tools require manual installation
* there are bugs in the gtsetup.sh script

## Updated corpus online

See **Ciprian´s** document about the corpus content in
`$GTPRIV/plan/corpus/oslo_corpus_update_todo.txt`.

Issues:
* filenames
* organisation of subdirs?
* content (or lack thereof) of original and converted files
* svn repo reorganisation

```
facta$convert2xml.pl --nolog --corpdir=/usr/local/share/corp L1allOrt.correct.txt
```

Error message:
```
sh: /home/sjur/gtmain/gt/script/text_cat: No such file or directory
L1allOrt.correct.txt: ERROR errors in /home/sjur/gtmain/gt/script/text_cat -q \
   -x -d /home/sjur/gtmain/gt/script/LM "/usr/local/share/corp/tmp/L1allOrt.correct.txt.tmp0": 
```

`text_cat` isn't part of our repository, we need to add it - we are using a
modified version of the original file. It should be added with a short README
and some license info, pointing to the original.

**TODO:**
* make the conversion scripts work with the new svn repository
  (**Børre, Ciprian**)
    - add check for almost empty content
        - already implemented in convert2xml.pl. Still empty or almost empty files
    are converted. This is because of unexpected structure of content, so that
    the conversion goes wrong, and leaves no real content in the resulting xml
    file.
    - add processing of svg files
        - not done
* reorganise subdirs as needed (**Ciprian, Trond**)
    - not yet done
* identify parallel nob files - should be automatic, but needs to be checked
  (**Ciprian**)
* sentence-align sme with nob (**Ciprian**)
    - the aligner wasn't working, **Børre** has tried to fix it
        - not yet fixed - bug not found
* analyse/disambiguate (**Ciprian**)
* preferably also dep -> check with Oslo if it can be used (**Ciprian**)
* install in Oslo (**Ciprian, Trond**)
* add better handling of unknown strings in our analysers (**???**)

## Corpus infra remake

**TODO:**
* fix the upload script after the corpus infra remake (**Børre**)
* turn on corpus summary crontab (**Børre**)
* needs to check the conversion from old rcs corpus repository to new svn-based
  repository (**Ciprian**)
* add checkout of the free corpus to the gtsetup.sh script (**Børre, Sjur**)
    - done
* add checkout of the bound corpus when on victorio (**Børre, Sjur**)
    - this is not needed, use the shared data
* add updates of free & bound to the svnup alias (**Børre**)
    - done for free
* test `convert2xml.pl`, especially on victorio (**Børre, Sjur**)
    - works on victorio? Yes. for all users? Haven't heard the opposite
    - works on other macs? Exchange `/usr/bin/perl` with `/opt/local/bin/perl`
   due to a bug in the Mac version of perl (v. 5.10.xxx ) — after a short
   discussion it turned out that this was only needed for a feature not used
   anymore, and thus the whole issue can be dismissed

## Corpus interface

This depends on the infrastructure cleanup.

**TODO:**
* make a simple web search form for the UiT corpus repository (**Ciprian**)
* check out the new version of CWB with Unicode support (**Ciprian**)
    - fall

## Makefile + tag simplification

Augment all instances of `W3` with `W3:+Err/Sub`.

**TODO:**
* convert M4 twolc processing to transducer manipulation (**Tomi, Sjur**)
    - first do norm/desc merging
    - then do hyphenation

## HFST compilation

Our HFST transducers do still contain all the extra tags resulting from the tag
conversion (cf above). The Apertium versions do not, however. The main problem
here is the forking of smi transducer builing and maintenance - one branch in 
Giellatekno, and another in Apertium. This is not good for future maintenance,
and should be corrected ASAP. The tag-removing make steps should be
incorporated in the giellatekno svn.

## Discussion forum server/software

We just decided to use the preinstalled (and working/running) wiki/blog software
already on the XServe. The url is
[http://divvun.no/groups/sorsamiskleksikografi/].

**TODO:**
* define requirements (**Børre, Ciprian, David, Roy Kvitfjell, Sjur**)
    - first meeting this week's Wednesday 9:30 Norwegian time using Skype, etc.
        - done
* identify appropriate software (wiki, Google Groups, whatever)
    - nohting to identify
* install, test on the XServe
    - nothing to install and test
* announce
    - done

## General list

To accommodate future enhancements in different directions (in rough order of
importance):

1. test bench for all parts of our language technology efforts
    1. test bench enhanced, but not yet complete
1. improve Forrest i18n support with static sites
1. reorganise the documentation:
    1. differ between target groups
    1. get better grouping
    1. decide what to write in Forrest and what in wiki
   (cf. [Apertium](http://www.apertium.org/) and 
   [http://xixona.dlsi.ua.es/apertium/]) for a similar split)
    1. update/add missing parts
1. migrate lexc lexicons to XML, splitting the task
    1. Name lexica (the Name project)
    1. Dictionaries (already in XML, task is to integrate them)
    1. At least migrate the lexc open POSes (Komi as a pilot case)
1. change the look of the documentation web
1. corpus content moved to Max Planck repositories? Norsk språkbank?
1. update infrastructure to allow content-restricted spellers for special target
  groups

**TODO:**
* forrest makeover: (**Børre, Sjur**)
    - make the site build again
    - upgrade all forrest installations, so we are all using the same baseline
    - make the readme files for the proofing tools functional again
    - implement language switch for static divvun site
* make the new SL Server services functional: (**Børre**)
    - group calendars
* finish the restructuring  and cleaning of the `script/` directory
  **Ciprian**)
* infrastructure remake: (**Børre, Ciprian, Sjur, Tomi, Trond**)
    - more modularised make / build infra (prepare for smn, sms, sjd, others)
        - look at omorfi for ideas of how to modularise
    - merge gt, kt and st into one
    - modularised preprocess and spellrelax
    - alternatives to make:
        - [SCons](http://www.scons.org/)
        - [makepp](http://makepp.sourceforge.net/)
        - [Maven](http://maven.apache.org/) (for java-projects)
        - [CMake](http://www.cmake.org/) - **Sjur** looked at it, and have started to
    experiment
* make a test-all target that runs all tests we have (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
    - delayed until we have restructured the make/build process
* define and document testing routines (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
    - delayed until we have restructured the make/build process

# Linguistics

## North Sámi

There are a lot of hyphens found in noun paradigms. They should not be there.
Trond and Thomas will look into them.

**TODO:**
* check extra hyphens in the sme lexc continuations (**Thomas, Trond**)

## Lule Sámi

**TODO:**
* check extra hyphens in the smj lexc continuations (**Thomas, Trond**)

## South Sámi

**TODO:**
* go through the lexicon and add for all loan words a form corresponding to the
  suggestion from Ove Lorentz (other forms should be SUB-marked)
  (**Maja, Thomas**)
* adjectives (**Maja** with **Thomas, Trond, Sjur**)
    - two competing naming conventions of continuation lexicons
        - One naming goes ATTRSUFF-PREDSUFF-STEMTYPE
        - One follows the `sme` convention of naming key adjectives
        - There are duplicate lexica
    - The comparative issue open here and there

        - The ATTRSUFF-PREDSUFF-STEMTYPE lexica now go to EVENCOMP and
    ODDCOMP only.
* finish compound tags for adjectives (**Maja**)

# Name lexicon/risten.no infrastructure

Most of the items that used to be listed here are now moved to the new risten2
project, scheduled for next year.

**TODO:**
* refine the requirements for risten.no 2.0 (**Ciprian, Sjur, TermTeam, SD**)

# Dictionaries

**Ciprian** has made a new online/offline dictionary interface based on
Apertium tools. See [http://gtsvn.uit.no/webdict/gtd_lookup.html].

StarDict is useless for Cyrillic languages, mainly because of the scanning
function (ie point and look-up). We need to find an alternative to StarDict.
Also, the Kildin Sámi users have different needs than we have had in mind. And
they don't have access to a Kildin Sámi keyboard in Windows.

* we need a Russian Windows machine, bought in Russia, using the software they
  use
* we also of course need a western/Norwegian Windows machine for testing

Released:
* SME:NOB update release

Other things dictionary-related:
* risten.no data as part of our dictionaries
* dictionaries as part of risten.no
* dictionaries and risten.no as part of Autshumato ITE

**TODO:**
* kom:fin-eng
    - moved the original kom-lex.xml to the inc-dir and froze it
    - split it by pos into the working_file dir, the ONLY place to work with
   the dictionary entries
    - now, the lexC files are generated via XSLT sheets, no perl scripts
    - adjusted the Makefile
    - prepared the pipeline for compiling the mac dict
    - todo: make a pipeline for StarDict also (as far as I know, **Jaska** has)
   a Linux machine
* set up risten.no on eXist/XServe (as a beta version site) (**Sjur**)
* set up required infra for smenob on risten.no/XServe (**Sjur**)
* Continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
* end user documentation (how to download and install) (**Ciprian, Trond**)
* Contact *Davvi Girji* about cooperation on electronic dictionaries
  (**Sjur**)
* developing the mobile phone version of smenob:
    - [http://pfed.info/wksite/]
* Komi
    - take out the doublets to a separate file (**Ciprian**)
    - merge the doublets (**Jaska, Trond**)
    - Completing the automaton to some state (**Trond, Jaska, Paula**)
* make the sort XSL script available for all languages to keep the source files
  sorted

# Proofing tools

Spelling feedback from Malta:
* use FST to model suggestions (Krister et al)
* Lene is evaluating the output of the Polderland speller
    - first-letter errors rare, but the PLX speller still changes it quite often
    - Oahpa and Divvun approaching each other
* using Wikipedia as a source for spelling errors and test material (a French
  group has made a setup of tools to automatise most of this)

## South Sámi

**TODO:**
* test conversion to xml to ensure there are no markup errors
  (**Maja, Sjur, Thomas**)
* difftest for fst and PL speller (**Sjur**)
* write readme file (**Sjur, Thomas, Tomi**)
* new beta version on Friday, September 17; check-in deadline on Thur (**Tomi**)

## HFST- and Voikko-based proofing tools

**TODO:**
* run tests using Hunspell, Voikko, Polderland for our Sámi lexicons
  (**Sjur, Tomi**)
* check out the voikko code, see [this page
| https://sourceforge.net/apps/trac/voikko/wiki/libvoikko/IntegrationTesting]
  or [this page](http://voikko.sourceforge.net/source-mac.html)
  (**Tomi**)
* try to compile Voikko (development is done on Linux, no MacOS X testing so
  far) (**Tomi**)
* add voikko support to our proofing test bench (**Sjur**)
* add all our Sámi analysers and test them as spellers (**Tomi, Sjur**)

## Speller bugs

List of bugs returned from Polderland:
* 621
* 630
* 652
* 656
* 676

Tag reordering for abbreviations have caused a lot of problems:

```
smj:
hr.
hr.	hr+ABBR+Acc
cand.philol.
cand.philol.	cand.philol+ABBR+N+Acc
Per
Per	Per+N+Prop+Mal+Sg+Attr

sme:
hr.
hr.	hr+N+ABBR+Acc
Per
Per	Per+N+Prop+Mal+Sg+Attr
```

Open issues based on test results:

### sme
Version: **Davvisámi, version 1.2, 2009-09-18**
* 399 - missing numerals (plural forms) - still **OPEN**
* 425 - X not recognised; single letters were left out - still **OPEN**
* 435 - roman numbers - inflection of single letter numbers
        rejected, as well as some complex numbers (but is ok in `smj`) -
        still **OPEN**
    - we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
        separate lexicon file
* 461 - **REGRESSION:** missing suggestion (sáhkki)
* 508 - **REGRESSION:** accepts smj entries (most likely abbreviation missing)
* 520 - **REGRESSION:** r9 and š9 not defined (abbr. missing)
* 595 - prefix+name without hyphen (*ovdaLot* instead of *ovda-Lot*) -
        still **OPEN**
* 603 - suomabealdi accepted - still **OPEN**
* 606 - compound-tags LEXICON VUOHTA - still **OPEN**
* 613 - short gen. as second compound part - still **OPEN**
* 619 - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails - *vihttasoarttat*
        remaining - still **OPEN**
* 629 - *a* taking part in compounding without hyphen - still **OPEN**
    - only open case has word *A-finálaid* compounded
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still **OPEN**, open case has uppercase letters
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still **OPEN**
* 661 - **REGRESSION:** abbr. not recognized
* 709 - sámedikkeválga accepted - **OPEN**
* 728 - vowel shortening GenCmp+Left-tagged - still **OPEN**
* 779 - caseforms of pronoun okatahat - still **OPEN**
* 785 - does not recognize alphabet-abbr+noun - **OPEN**
* 802 - **NEW:** multiword propernouns
* 803 - **NEW:** FINJU- words accepted single-handed
* 804 - **NEW:** guovttilogát, njealjilogát
* 805 - **NEW:** Nouns+acronyms

### smj
Version: **Julevsáme, version 1.2, 2009-09-20**
* 435 - roman number - single letter numbers now recognised
    -      we should pre-generate all numbers once and for all, and store them in
        a separate lexicon file
    -      please note that *inflection* of single letter numerals is **fine**
        in `smj`, as opposed to `sme`
* 482 - *polardutkamin* not recognized - **FIXED**
* 496 - **REGRESSION:** unrecognised clitics
* 556 - non-existent word accepted - **FIXED**
* 594 - *lågenanguoktáj* not recognized - still **OPEN**
* 595 - **REGRESSION:** prefix+name as split comp without hyphen
* 596 - C-giellan is not accepted - still **OPEN**
* 600 - Gen+hyph compound - **FIXED**
* 627 - prefix + hyhpen does not get accepted - **FIXED**
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still **OPEN**, open case has uppercase letters
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still **OPEN**
* 650 - **REGRESSION:** noun prefix+name compound without hyphen
* 652 - UPPERCASE-typos only get acronym-suggestions - still **OPEN**
* 692 - numeral-variants - all but one fixed (*gáktsalågenantjuotakta*), but
        still **OPEN**
* 744 - **REGRESSION:** numerals + clitic
* 803 - **NEW:** VINJU- words accepted single-handed
* 805 - **NEW:** Nouns+acronyms

**TODO:**
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion (**Tomi**)

## Hyphenator bugs

Open issues based on test results :

### sme
Lexicon version: **Davvisámi, version 1.2, 2009-09-18**

No known issues!

### smj
Lexicon version: **Julevsáme, version 1.2, 2009-09-20**
* 670 - Hard hyphen replaced with soft hyphen: *10-biejvvásattja* (the word
        is not rec.; Bug #711) - still **OPEN**

### sma

Command to test the hyphenator:

```
preprocess dev/corp/pressemelding.txt | lookup bin/hyph-sma.fst | cut -f2 | \
lookup bin/hyphrules-sma.fst | grep -v '^$' | cut -f2 | uniq | see
```

**TODO:**
* fix PL hyphenator errors (**Tomi**)
    - almost done - one `smj` bug left

## Installer changes

**TODO:**
* test InDesign installer (**Sjur**)

## User documentation

**TODO:**
* InDesign documentation (**Sjur**)
    - Norwegian translation received from Davvi Girji

## 1.2 release

Content:
* several smj bug fixes
* lexicalisations
* InDesign Mac & Win
* new OOo beta
* improved installers, at least for Mac, preferably also for Windows

## 2.0 release

Content:
* official `sma` proofing tools release

# Nordplus Språk proofing test bench project

Arno Teigseth is hired for the summer. He is sitting in Equador, 7 hours after
Norway. He is working with a quechua speller (using hunspell) and dictionary.

A goal is to use texts from parallel domains, in order to be
able to compare nob and sme. We start out with 100000 words, 5000
for each genre:
1. Discussion fora on the net
1. Blogs

Discussion fora can be problematic, as they contain a lot of very oral language
with deliberate oral or dialectal forms used in the text. As such, the texts
won't be typical for the kind of texts people would like to spell-check, and
thus the genre is problematic for the purpose at hand.

Possible other genres:
1. Minutes from local associations
1. Pupil texts - look for the home pages of the schools
1. exam texts by 10th grade pupils, where the pupils have published the texts
  themselves
1. skrivebua - Nordland fylkeskommune: all three Sámi languages

# Text to speech

There will be regular meetings in this project from now on, every second week.

**TODO:**
* put together the preprocessing transducers and scripts (**Tomi**)
* refine syntax / dependency rules (**Biret Ánne**)
* continue public tender process (**Sjur**)

# Machine Translation

Background:

Kevin and Ryan have now closed the work on smenob and finsme. They will
continue, but mainly do other things. As for smesmj, the possible student
input is rescheduled for October.

We hope to have a student working one month on smesmj this summer.
The world now knows (vaguely) that we work on MT, so we should do, as well.
We also need to work together with the external ones.

## All languages

**TODO:**
* Improve the sme-dis for MT purposes
* Go through the bilingual transfer lexica for more general translations
* Add alternative translations and selection rules
* Arrange an Apertium seminar (later)
* transfer hfst build infra from Apertium to Giellatekno

## finsme

Technical problems with compunds in Finnish: each part in the compound is
separated by a space character (+Ux20), which is creating problems in the
transfer.

**TODO**
* Tag unification
* Adp split in fin (**Trond**)

## smenob

Needed: Lexicon completion. Grammatical transfer rules

## smesmj

New worker underway.

## smesma

Infrastructure in place, to demo in Trondheim to encourage more work and
projects.

# CAT

**Ciprian** has made a translation memory based on our parallel corpus. The
test looks promising, he has identified certain issues. We need to be clear
about the license of the original parallel texts, and we need to know the
original language (ie translation direction).

**TODO:**
* make intelligent nobsme risten.no - requires `nob` morphology
    - nob.fst a la Trond
    - norskordbank.fst
    - nob.fst based on an xml source synchronised with Ordbanken source texts
    - should be coordinated with the Apertium analyser
* write a TM script to turn a parallell corpus into TM entries (**Ciprian**)
    - deadline: next Monday, 20.9.
* testing A-ITE on Norwegian Windows
    - done by our friends in RSA - bug identified, workaround sent by e-mail

# SMA seminar in August/September

The forum/wiki thing is done and running.

**TODO:**
* write a summary of the Friday discussion (**Sjur**)
    - done
* set up communication routines: GoogleTalk, Skype (**Sjur**)
    - done
* send out an e-mail to the participants containing summary and communication
  instructions (**Maja**)
    - Sjur did it
* set up discussion forum + wiki (or similar) - see above
    - done
* update the XXE configuration to include the oahpa additions
  (**Ciprian, Sjur**)
    - the last svn version should have it - test, and distribute

# Other

## Start to make yearly reports

Directory in svn in place, now we only need to fill it with content...

## Thursday inhouse seminar

Topic for this week: hfst + spelling + ocr (**Sjur**, perhaps **Lene**)

Next time suggestion list:
1. introduction to xslt - **Ciprian** to start out
    1.  relevant xslt issues:
    1.  basic principles of xslt …
    1.  sorting in xslt … (have a look at the dictionary sort xslt script)
    1.  converting from one xml format to another wilt xslt (sugg: convert from
    DivvunGT dictionary dtd to MacDict xml)

Future seminars:
1. XQuery
1. More XML (needs concretisation)
1. UML
1. other suggestions?

## Fall planning

Topics:
* speller test project -> Sjur, Børre, Thomas, X
* speech synthesis -> Sjur, Trond, BA as a starter
* risten.no -> Ciprian, Sjur, Tomi
* Barents project follow-up meeting -> Trond, Sjur
* sme and smj proofing tools, next version -> Thomas, Tomi, Sjur
* HFST-based proofing tools -> Sjur
* MT terminology project -> Trond, Linda, Fran, Kevin
* Lexicography seminar follow-up (evt. jan-feb)
* Participate in Sámi center sje-project -> gt

Dates:
* September 22-23: Mo i Rana/Nasjonalbiblioteket/OCR
* October 11.-15. sma-oahpa kickoff (**sma-oahpa group**)
* October 27-28: Linköping seminar on multilinguality and accessibility
                  (**Sjur**)
* November 1st: Noregsuniversitetet sme-oahpa2 application deadline
* November: full-scale lexc course in Budapest (**Sjur**)
* Desember: Divvun release

# Next meeting, closing

The next meeting is 20.9.2010, 09:30 Norwegian time.

The meeting was closed at 11:46.

# Appendix - task lists for the next week

## Boerre

* get the 2006-2010 Sámi Parliament protocolls into our repository
* find and contact the correct person in SD, to get the manuscript for all Sámi
  teaching material now being given out to the schools
* fix the upload script after the corpus infra remake
* forrest makeover:
    - make the site build again
    - upgrade all forrest installations, so we are all using the same baseline
    - make the readme files for the proofing tools functional again
    - implement language switch for static divvun site
* contact the Sámi translators at the government and ministeries to get more
  parallell texts
* turn on corpus summary crontab
* improve XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Draw document
* get translations of thank-you letter
* make the new SL Server services functional:
    - group calendars
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Ciprian

* compile a db with parallel texts sme-nob for Autsch (deadline 20.09.2010)
* refine the dict sorting script to indent like XXE
* update the XXE configuration to include the oahpa additions
* 'Nachwehen' of the Sma-lex Workshop:
    - xml-ize all data from the Excel, Word, etc. files received from the
   different participants
    - enrich the data for the duodje terminology for users' need
* Kildin-Oahpa:
    - fix the localization bug (the sjd text doesn't show up)
* fitswe: check verbs from the csv-files and if needed put them into the xml
  format
* Skolt-Oahpa:
    - fine tuning of semantic tags
    - finish localization
* PhD-Projektbeskrivelse (internal deadline end of September 2010):
    - search, read, write (execute): high priority!
* update corpora (both monolingual and parallel) for Oslo (Glossa)
    - check the correctness of parallelity between sme and nob files
    - sentence-align sme with nob: fix tca2 problem or search for a working
   solution (a different aligner)
    - analyse/disambiguate: todo -- waiting for the last version of FSTs
* infrastructure
    - test cwb
    - continue with restructuring and cleaning the script catalogue as suggested
   in the newsgroup
    - transform sme-lexC files into XML format
    - make a schema/dtd description of the lexC-file (experiment with
   Komi and Romanian)
* GT web:
    - add a tree visualizer for the dependency trees
    - add input help for special characters on the tool sites
    - automatise the web statistics
    - filter (English, German, etc.) input using language detection tools
    - put a note on the sites that these are NOT MT tools
    - input help for generating wordforms (dropdown menus).
* Sandbox Oahpa:
    - integrate reCAPTCHA into Django (as **Lene** suggested)
    - debug the installed sb_oahpa
    - update and correct the Oapha docu site
* Running Oahpa:
    - implement a testbench for Vasta (as **Lene** needs)
    - integrate reCAPTCHA after the SB-test
    - add an Oahpa clock and date excercise (cf. Numra)
* dictionaries, generally:
    - synchronize the source language entries from a specific dictionary with the 
   entries in the morphology component (now especially for sma):
   that means nothing then put the entries from dict that are NOT analyzed
   into the lexC files
    - the StarDict on Windows: try the HTML-plugin (that means that users can use
   StarDict 3.2)
    - try to reduce the dict-size on mac: experiment with xPointer, etc.
* Fkv:Nob - Nob:Fkv:
    - incorporate novel glossary into the dict
* SmeNob:
    - incorporate the passives into the last version of the sme:nob
    - start a new compilation of SmeNob and improve it based on the experience
   gained with SmaNob
* SmaNobSwe:
    - extend the smanobswe dictionary: waiting for data (incorporate the data from
   Maja-Lisa)
* MT
    - test A-ITE on Windows

## Maja

* more work on `sma` adjectives
* go through the lexicon and add for all loan words a form corresponding to the
  suggestion from Ove Lorentz (other forms should be SUB-marked)
* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts
* finish compound tags for adjectives
* Rette goldstandard doc - så mange som mulig - high prio! - min. 1000 (helst
  5000) ord løpende tekst
* test conversion to xml to ensure there are no markup errors in goldstandards
* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts
    - get `sma` articles in Š-bláđđi
    - the Gun Utsi book is almost there - one contract missing
* Corpus gathering: 
    - contact Inga Margrethe Bjørn Eira
**follow up the yearbook-articles
    - restart the letter mailing thing using WebSak
* adjectives
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Sjur

* update the XXE configuration to include the oahpa additions
* write sma beta readme file
* forrest makeover:
    - make the site build again
    - upgrade all forrest installations, so we are all using the same baseline
    - make the readme files for the proofing tools functional again
* convert M4 twolc processing to transducer manipulation
* add voikko support to our proofing test bench
* add all our Sámi analysers to voikko and test them as spellers
* run tests using Hunspell, Voikko, Polderland for our Sámi lexicons
* difftest for fst and PL speller
* Northern areas
    - plan a meeting/seminar in Tromsø
    - make a plan for the first two years, update overall plan
* @TTS: continue public tender process
* make **Leif Åge** send out CD's to distribution points
* continue Nordplus Sprog project
* make XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Thomas
* go through sma loanwords and change according to Trondheim findings
* write sma readme file
* check extra hyphens in the lexc continuations with Trond
* Digitalize south saami books
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Tomi
* new `sma` beta on Friday, September 17; compilation to start Thursday 17:00
* run tests using Hunspell, Voikko, Polderland for our Sámi lexicons
* put together the TTS preprocessing transducers and scripts
* try to compile voikko
* add all our Sámi analysers and test them as spellers
* convert M4 twolc processing to transducer manipulation
* write sma beta readme file
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
* fix double hyphen bugs
* fix PL `smj` hyphenator bug
* fix PL conversion bugs
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond

* check extra hyphens in the lexc continuations with Thomas
* Course plan for Barents meeting/seminar, october. Financing must be in place.
    - check the time needed to tet visas with the UiT admin
    - plan a meeting/seminar in Tromsø
    - make a plan for the first two years, update overall plan
* MT/Terminology
* sma-oahpa: text analysis and setup of basic vocabulary
* check extra hyphens in the lexc continuations with Thomas
* Follow up the issue of Windows test machines with IT dept
* New corpus interface for Oslo (with Ciprian)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
