Directory structure for the source code
=======================================

The project specific documentation are in the xtdoc module, the divvun
project's files are in the sd directory, the university project's files
are in the gtuit directory. The common documentation and source code of
these two projects is in the gt svn module.

The project is located in the directory *gt/* (an acronym for
*giellateknologiija*, language technology). These are the subdirectories
(the abbreviations for the different languages are in accordance with
the ISO 639-2 standard for language codes):

-   *doc/* = Documentation directory, which contains this documentation,
    and has the following subdirectories:
    -   *admin/* = Contains files related to project administration
    -   *infra/* = Documents how to set up users and machines and
        contains information on how the servers are set up.
    -   *lang/* = Contains documentation on the lexica and language
        files for the Saami languages.
    -   *ling/* = Contains documentation on topics common to all
        languages.
    -   *tools/* = Howtos for the tools used by the project.
-   *script/* = script files, with *cgi-bin*, *emacs* and *testing* as
    subdirectories, along with other script files
-   *smi/* = files relevant to all the languages, e.g. proper names,
-   *sme/* = North Sámi
-   *smj/* = Lule Sámi
-   *sma/* = South Sámi
-   *smn/* = Inari Sámi
-   *sms/* = Skolt Sámi
-   *sjd/* = Kildin Sámi
-   *www/* = directory for web-related issues
-   *tmp/* = directory for temporary storing of script files under
    compilation.

Each language directory has the following subdirectories:

-   *bin/* the program files, these are automatically generated by the
    **make** command
-   *dev/* developer's file (store your own notes here if needed)
-   *corp/* corpus files (cf. the README file in the corp/ directory)
-   *int/* intermediate binary files, not that relevant to the final
    parsers
-   *src/*, the source files, our crown jewels
-   *testing/*, containing files for morphology testing (how to conduct
    such testing is explained on the [Testing
    tools](../ling/docu-testing.html) page)

The *gt/* directory is copied to the home directory of each user by the
[svn program](/tools/docu-svn-user.html).
