infra/VirtualServers.md, before:

# Virtual servers

Here we document our servers and common machines. If some servers are down, see our [in case of a crisis document](DontPanic.html)

## List over the machines

All new machines are Ubuntu 22.04.

Machine | Managed by | Age | Specs | Services
---|---|---|---|---
divvun.uit.no     | Divvun      | old | | ?
divvun-02.uit.no  | Divvun      | new | | ?
satni.uit.no      | Divvun      | old | | ?
satni-02.uit.no   | Divvun      | new | | ?
gtsvn-01.uit.no   | Divvun      | old | | svn server
gtsvn-02.uit.no   | Divvun      | new | | svn server
gtdict.uit.no     | Giellatekno | old | 32GB RAM, 8 CPUs | Neahttadigisanit
gtdict-02.uit.no  | Giellatekno | new | 32GB RAM, 8 CPUs | Neahttadigisanit
gtweb-01.uit.no   | Giellatekno | old | | webpipeline, apertium, korp, webdict, metadict
gtweb-02.uit.no   | Giellatekno | new | 16GB RAM, 4 CPUs | webpipeline, apertium, korp, webdict, metadict
gtoahpa-01.uit.no | Giellatekno | old | | oahpa.no
gtoahpa-02.uit.no | Giellatekno | new | 16GB RAM, 4 CPUs | oahpa.no, kuvsje, kursa, oahpa instances
gtlab.uit.no      | (?)         | old | | (not in use)

- divvun.uit.no
- satni.uit.no
- gtsvn-01.uit.no
- gtsvn-02.uit.no
- gtdict.uit.no
- gtdict-02.uit.no
- gtweb-01.uit.no
- gtweb-02.uit.no
- gtoahpa-01.uit.no
- gtoahpa-02.uit.no
- gtlab.uit.no

Each machine is documented below.

## divvun.uit.no

## gtlab.uit.no

- Specifications:

  - OS: Fedora 28
  - CPU: 8
  - Minne: 16GB

- Running services:
  - none

## gtoahpa-01.uit.no

- Specifications:

  - OS: Centos 7
  - CPU: 8
  - Minne: 16GB

- Running services:
  - oahpa
    - sme_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/davvi/>)
    - sms_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/nuorti/>)
    - sma_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/aarjel/>)
    - sjd_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/kiilt/>) (disabled)
    - smn_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/aanaar/>)
    - est_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/eesti/>)
    - vro_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/voro/>)
    - fkv_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/kveeni/>)
    - myv_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/erzya/>)
    - crk_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/nehiyawetan/>)
  - others
    - konteaksta (<https://oahpa.no/konteaksta/>) (temporarily unavailable)
    - kuvsje (<https://kuvsje.oahpa.no/>)
    - kursa (<https://kursa.oahpa.no/>)

## gtdict.uit.no

- Specifications:

  - OS: Centos 7
  - CPU: 8
  - Minne: 16GB

- Running services:
  - NDS:
    - <https://sanit.oahpa.no>
    - <https://baakoeh.oahpa.no>
    - <https://kyv.oahpa.no>
    - <https://muter.oahpa.no>
    - <https://saanih.oahpa.no>
    - <https://vada.oahpa.no>
    - <https://bahkogirrje.oahpa.no>
    - <https://saan.oahpa.no>
    - <https://sanat.oahpa.no>
    - <https://sanj.oahpa.no>
    - <https://sonad.oahpa.no>
    - <https://valks.oahpa.no>

## gtsvn-01.uit.no

## gtsvn.uit.no

## gtweb-01.uit.no

- Specifications:

  - OS: Centos 7
  - CPU: 4
  - Minne: 16GB

- Running services:
  - korp
    - sme, smj, sma, smn, sms, nob_parallel and fin_parallel (<https://gtweb.uit.no/korp>)
    - fkv, fit, vep, vro, fkv_parallel (<https://gtweb.uit.no/f_korp/>)
    - kpv, koi, udm, mdf, myv, mrj, mhr (<https://gtweb.uit.no/u_korp/>)
  - others
    - Jorgal/MT-testing/Apertium (<https://gtweb.uit.no/jorgal/>, <https://gtweb.uit.no/mt/>, <https://gtweb.uit.no/mt-testing/>)
    - cgi-bin
    - webdicts

## satni.uit.no (oppgradert)

## Other documentation

Admin documentation/log:

- private/admin/README-admin-gtoahpa.txt: for changes, package installation, and other things that must remain private.

General practices:

- Admin group on the four (following CentOS) are to add users to the wheel group (usermod -G wheel USER).

Commit message:

add link to gtweb-02 service script

infra/VirtualServers.md, after:

# Virtual servers

Here we document our servers and common machines. If some servers are down, see our [in case of a crisis document](DontPanic.html)

## List over the machines

All new machines are Ubuntu 22.04.

Machine | Managed by | Age | Specs | Services
---|---|---|---|---
divvun.uit.no     | Divvun      | old | | ?
divvun-02.uit.no  | Divvun      | new | | ?
satni.uit.no      | Divvun      | old | | ?
satni-02.uit.no   | Divvun      | new | | ?
gtsvn-01.uit.no   | Divvun      | old | | svn server
gtsvn-02.uit.no   | Divvun      | new | | svn server
gtdict.uit.no     | Giellatekno | old | 32GB RAM, 8 CPUs | Neahttadigisanit
gtdict-02.uit.no  | Giellatekno | new | 32GB RAM, 8 CPUs | Neahttadigisanit
gtweb-01.uit.no   | Giellatekno | old | | webpipeline, apertium, korp, webdict, metadict
gtweb-02.uit.no   | Giellatekno | new | 16GB RAM, 4 CPUs | webpipeline, apertium, korp, webdict, metadict
gtoahpa-01.uit.no | Giellatekno | old | | oahpa.no
gtoahpa-02.uit.no | Giellatekno | new | 16GB RAM, 4 CPUs | oahpa.no, kuvsje, kursa, oahpa instances
gtlab.uit.no      | (?)         | old | | (not in use)

- divvun.uit.no
- satni.uit.no
- gtsvn-01.uit.no
- gtsvn-02.uit.no
- gtdict.uit.no
- gtdict-02.uit.no
- gtweb-01.uit.no
- gtweb-02.uit.no
- gtoahpa-01.uit.no
- gtoahpa-02.uit.no
- gtlab.uit.no

Each machine is documented below.

## divvun.uit.no

## gtlab.uit.no

- Specifications:

  - OS: Fedora 28
  - CPU: 8
  - Minne: 16GB

- Running services:
  - none

## gtoahpa-01.uit.no

- Specifications:

  - OS: Centos 7
  - CPU: 8
  - Minne: 16GB

- Running services:
  - oahpa
    - sme_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/davvi/>)
    - sms_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/nuorti/>)
    - sma_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/aarjel/>)
    - sjd_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/kiilt/>) (disabled)
    - smn_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/aanaar/>)
    - est_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/eesti/>)
    - vro_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/voro/>)
    - fkv_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/kveeni/>)
    - myv_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/erzya/>)
    - crk_oahpa_project (<https://oahpa.no/nehiyawetan/>)
  - others
    - konteaksta (<https://oahpa.no/konteaksta/>) (temporarily unavailable)
    - kuvsje (<https://kuvsje.oahpa.no/>)
    - kursa (<https://kursa.oahpa.no/>)

## gtdict.uit.no

- Specifications:

  - OS: Centos 7
  - CPU: 8
  - Minne: 16GB

- Running services:
  - NDS:
    - <https://sanit.oahpa.no>
    - <https://baakoeh.oahpa.no>
    - <https://kyv.oahpa.no>
    - <https://muter.oahpa.no>
    - <https://saanih.oahpa.no>
    - <https://vada.oahpa.no>
    - <https://bahkogirrje.oahpa.no>
    - <https://saan.oahpa.no>
    - <https://sanat.oahpa.no>
    - <https://sanj.oahpa.no>
    - <https://sonad.oahpa.no>
    - <https://valks.oahpa.no>

## gtsvn-01.uit.no

## gtsvn.uit.no

## gtweb-01.uit.no

- Specifications:

  - OS: Centos 7
  - CPU: 4
  - Minne: 16GB

- Running services:
  - korp
    - sme, smj, sma, smn, sms, nob_parallel and fin_parallel (<https://gtweb.uit.no/korp>)
    - fkv, fit, vep, vro, fkv_parallel (<https://gtweb.uit.no/f_korp/>)
    - kpv, koi, udm, mdf, myv, mrj, mhr (<https://gtweb.uit.no/u_korp/>)
  - others
    - Jorgal/MT-testing/Apertium (<https://gtweb.uit.no/jorgal/>, <https://gtweb.uit.no/mt/>, <https://gtweb.uit.no/mt-testing/>)
    - cgi-bin
    - webdicts

## gtweb-02.uit.no

Same services as gtweb-01. Services are managed by a service script, see
<https://github.com/giellatekno/gtweb-service-script>.

## satni.uit.no (oppgradert)

## Other documentation

Admin documentation/log:

- private/admin/README-admin-gtoahpa.txt: for changes, package installation, and other things that must remain private.

General practices:

- Admin group on the four (following CentOS) are to add users to the wheel group (usermod -G wheel USER).
