# Meeting setup

* Date: 7.9.2009
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Internet
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat

# Agenda

Cf. one of the following, depending on context:
* the upper bar of the SEE window (provided you use the JSPWiki syntax mode)
* the TOC in Forrest-rendered output, like HTML and PDF

# Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 10:15.

Present:
**Børre, Ciprian, Maja, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi, Trond**

Absent: **none**

Agenda accepted as is.

# Updated task status since last meeting

## Børre
* update online download log statistics page
    - not done
* improve XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Draw document
    - not done
* `gt/Makefile` remake
    - not done
* Set up the apache server for the risten.no beta on the linux box + Xserve.
    - not done
* get translations of thank-you letter
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
* other:
    - worked on static i18n divvun.no
    - finished a letter incl. contracts to Nitteberg in WebSak ...
    - made files in divvun.no/static_files available through the apache server, in
   stead of via the forrest server. Downloaded files were sometimes truncated by
   forrest. This hopefully fixes the reports about installers that don't work.

## Ciprian
* MT: test Autshumato Alpha version on Windows
    - done but without Launcher... not working (to be redone)
* transform the Sami Law Terms DB (SLT-DB) into an eXist-usable format
    - todo
* make eXist running with the SLT-DB
    - todo
* make a schema/dtd description of the lexC-file (experiment with
  Romanian)
    - todo
* transform sme-lexC files into XML format
    - todo
* Bodø Oahpa:
    - generalize for language pairs
        - ongoing work, almost done
    - generalize for semantic classes and pos
        - ongoing work
    - implement a login mechanism
        - todo
    - implement an upload data mechanism
    - todo
    - setup the Bodø version on victorio
* Sandbox Oahpa:
    - setup the Sandbox version on victorio
        - todo
* Running Oahpa:
    - Check for IP numbers in the *Oahpa!* log
    - todo
    - add an Oahpa clock excercise
    - todo
    - Generate fin/xml/{nouns|verbs|adjectives}.xml, and implement the new Leksa
   dropdown menu
    - todo
* Komi
    - take out the doublets to a separate file
        - aparently not necessarily any longer: **Jaska** restructured the XML file
    accordingly
    - start looking at the komfin and komeng MacDicts
        - ongoing
* restructure and clean the script catalogue, using subdirs
    - todo
* check the processing of new corpus documents (error logging during conversion,
  conversion quality, documentation, etc.)
    - todo
* continue the search and testing of an appropriate tool for
  lexicon working (no xml-file editing via text editors!)
    - stopped (low priority)
* start the work at the komfineng dict
    - done: starting to convert the source format into GT-dictionary format
* incorporate the passives into the last version of the sme:nob
    - todo
* continue the work at the Kildin-Russian dictionary
    - stopped (low priority)
* check all bug in the sma:nob-swe dictionary
    - todo (high priority)
* extend the smanobswe dictionary
    - todo (high priority)
* fix the bug with the string length in the popup window (sma:nob)
    - todo
* try to reduce the dict-size on mac: experiment with xPointer, etc.
    - todo
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - todo

## Maja
* Prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
    - done, I will give it high prio.
* more work on `sma` adjectives
    - Working on it
* Send **Lena Kappfjell** and **Harald Gaski** a contract
    - We have recieved the contracts from Åsta Vangberg, but we have to send them
   back to her because she hasn´t written her name in all contracts
* Send formal letter to Gerd Pärsson about the book *Eahperestujmie*, Gosse
  dah jeatjebh åerieminie;
    - waiting for the letter from the author, David said he will forward it to us,
   then send it to Gerd Pärsson
* Tom Kappfjell
    - Received the contract from Tom Kappfjell
* Maja Dunfjeld
* Åsta Vangberg
    - take a phonecall to her and ask her about electronic files
* digitize southsámi books
    - Digitized some, has to digitize the rest of the books
* work with missing lists- southsámi
    - Working on it

## Sjur
* @Barents: plan a meeting/seminar with potential cooperation partners
    - nothing
* @Barents: plan for The Real Thing
    - nothing
* @TTS: start public tender process
    - nothing
* make **Leif Åge** send out CD's to distribution points
    - nothing
* start Nordplus Sprog project
    - nothing
* send eXist log files to **Ciprian**
    - nothing
* finalise formal letter to Laila Mattsson-Magga with **Maja**
    - nothing
* Write a formal letter to *Davvi girji* about electronic dictionaries
    - nothing
* package and deliver `sma` proofing tools (with **Tomi**)
    - nothing
* make XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
    - nothing
* continue to write a proofing API & implementation specification
    - nothing
* name db/risten.no
    - nothing
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
    - nothing
* support and maintenance contract for `sme` and `smj`, MS+Adobe tools
    - nothing
* Sámi languages as part of *Norsk språkbank*
    - nothing
* set up risten.no on eXist/XServe (as a beta version site)
    - nothing
* set up required infra for smenob on risten.no/XServe
    - nothing
* `sma` umlaut / derivation work
    - nothing
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
* other things:
    - TTS started
    - administration & bureaucrazy
    - preparations for and meeting with language technology coordinators in the
   Nordic language councils (the working group ASTIN)

## Thomas
* prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
    - worked
* `sma` adjectives
    - worked
* finish reformulating the proper noun grammar like the verbs
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - not done

## Tomi
* add missing Finnish translations in sme/xml/nouns.xml
    - didn't look into this
* fix screen sharing problem on **Maja's** computer
    - how is this issue now, Maja, Ciprian?
* package and deliver `sma` proofing tools (with **Sjur**)
    - nothing
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
    - not done
* fix double hyphen bugs
    - don't know if this is still an issue
* fix PL hyphenator bugs
    - don't know if this is still an issue
* fix PL and Hunspell conversion bugs
    - worked with
* infrastructure remake
    - not done
* `sma` umlaut / derivation work
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
* other
    - started compiling new spellers

## Trond
* add missing Finnish translations in sme/xml/nouns.xml
    - Done much. Open issues now down to 39. Tomi?
* @Barents: plan a meeting/seminar with potential cooperation partners
    - Nothing
* @Barents: plan for The Real Thing
    - Nothing
* @TTS: kick-off lunch at wednesday
    - Still not bought cake
* make Lene et al run the gtsetup.sh script
    - Awaiting Lenes new machine
* Mikogo for Lene and Linda
    - Awaiting Lenes new machine
* tts startup (with **Sjur**)
    - Done.
* Komi
    - merge the doublets
        - Done some work here. Now, Jaska has added a further layer on top
    of each article, and the fst no longer compiles (script/xml2lexc must
    be rewritten, or the wrapping changed).
    - Completing the automaton to some state
        - Not worked on it last week.
* `sma` proper noun grammar (with the rest of the sma gang)
    - No sma last week.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).

# Oahpa!

Meeting memos can be found at
[http://giellatekno.uit.no/ped/index.html#Meeting+memos]

Ciprian working on Oahpa! for Bodø. With respect to Lexa, the MySQL structures
and scripts are now multilingual-ready, and the database can be populated with
data for several language pairs at once. The application is next in the
multilingual treatment.

Trond and Lene are submitting an application to [Norgesuniversitetet
| http://norgesuniversitetet.no/prosjekter/utlysning/utlysing-av-midlar-til-prosjekt-innan-ikt-stotta-u]
for developing the programs further, and integrate them better with ongoing
university/college courses.

**TODO**
* Register oahpa.no (**Trond**)
* Check for IP numbers in the log (**Ciprian, Trond**)
* Add the 37 missing Finnish translations in sme/xml/nouns.xml (**Trond, Tomi**)
* Generate fin/xml/{nouns|verbs|adjectives}.xml, and implement the new Leksa
  dropdown menu (**Ciprian**).

# Corpus gathering

About OCR-scanned texts, a rewised procedure to secure more (and different)
speller testing material:
* scan and OCR the text
* add the OCR original to the corpus repository, with a filename addition like
  `.ocrorig`, all of it in the prooftest catalog
* proofread the OCR text to get it back to the spelling in the printed original
* store this OCR-corrected text in the corpus repository, as follows:
    - 10-20 % in `prooftest` (to be used as testing material for spellers etc)
    - the rest in `orig` (to be used for generating missing lists and linguistic
   testing)
* add spelling error markup to the texts in `prooftest`

**TODO:**
* Which books are digitized?
    - These books should be OCR'ed/digitized: Anna Jacobsens books
  *Don jih dan bïjre I-III*, *Jupmele rïjhke lea gietskesne*,
  *Luste lohkedh*, *Duedtie Novrlaantesne*, *Naestie-tjoevkesne*,
  *Gullie-tjååtsele*.
    - Its not digitized yet, should do it this week.
  A. Jacobsen: *Goltelidh jih soptestidh* and *Mojhtesh* are already
  in electronic form
    - use the corpus gathering document to keep track of each book
* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts (**Maja**)
    - get `sma` articles in Š-bláđđi
    - the Gun Utsi book is almost there - one contract missing (**Jovsset**)
        - will meet with the translator in July, and get the signature then
        - check with Jovsset whether he succeeded (**Maja**)
* read formal letter to Laila Mattsson-Magga by David (**Sjur**)
* write formal letter to Davvi Girji (**Sjur**)
* send a copy of the signed contracts back to the authors, translators and
  publishers, accompanied by the thank-you letter

# Promoting Divvun

Question about the download log. Do we have it? yes, but the public listing
isn't up-to-date. **Børre** will update it.

**TODO:**
* make leaflet to inform about the project (**Børre**)
    - add InDesign text (**Sjur**)
    - make XSL script to transform Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
   (**Børre, Sjur**)
* distribute CD version through the library bus, the language centres and common
  sami centres in all of Sápmi. Gaaltije in Östersund for example.
  (**Leif Åge, Sjur**)
    - make him send out CD's accordingly (**Sjur**)
* update online download log statistics page (**Børre**)

# Future plans, directions and ideas

See a separate document in `plan/strat/5year.jspwiki`.

## Northern areas project

**TODO:**
* Attend a beginners' course in Russian (priority: the alphabet!) near you..
* plan a meeting/seminar with potential cooperation partners (**Trond, Sjur**)
* plan for The Real Thing (**Trond, Sjur**)

# Infrastructure

**Børre** has been working on a static version of the Divvun.no site, instead
of running Forrest live.

To accomodate future enhancements in different directions (in rough order of
importance):

1. test bench for all parts of our language technology efforts
    1. test bench enhanced, but not yet complet
1. set up the Leopard Server features for collaborative support:
    1. permanent chat rooms
    1. stored (and indexed) chat transcripts of the chat rooms
    1. iCal server / group calendars
    1. wiki
1. wiki? on G5 (is part of Leopard Server) or other web-based documentation
1. improve Forrest stability and i18n support ( the divvun crashes)
    1. **Sjur** has been working on better i18n and pdf rendering
    1. **Børre** has some ideas for getting back to serving static html files
1. reorganise the documentation:
    1. differ between target groups
    1. get better grouping
    1. decide what to write in forrest and what in wiki
   (cf. [Apertium](http://www.apertium.org/) and
   [http://xixona.dlsi.ua.es/apertium/]) for a similar split)
    1. update/add missing parts
1. migrate lexc lexicons to XML, splitting the task
    1. Name lexica (the Name project)
    1. Dictionaries (already in XML, task is to integrate them)
    1. At least migrate the lexc open POSes (Komi as a pilot case)
1. change the look of the documentation web
1. use HFST as alternative to XFST
1. corpus content moved to Max Planck repositories? Norsk språkbank?
1. update infrastructure to allow content-restricted spellers for special target
  groups

**TODO:**
* ask Lene, Linda to install Mikogo (**Trond**)
* fix screen sharing problem on **Maja's** computer (**Tomi**)
* fix remaining issues in the gtsetup.sh script (**Sjur**)
* restructure and clean the script catalogue, using subdirs to categorise the
  scripts (**Ciprian**)
    - see posting in the news group
* infrastructure remake: (**Børre, Ciprian, Saara, Sjur, Tomi, Trond**)
    - more modularised make / build infra (prepare for smn, sms, sjd, others)
    - merge gt, kt and st into one
    - modularised preprocess and spellrelax
    - alternatives to make:
        - [SCons](http://www.scons.org/)
        - [makepp](http://makepp.sourceforge.net/)
        - [Maven](http://maven.apache.org/) (for java-projects)
        - [CMake](http://www.cmake.org/)
* make a test-all target that runs all tests we have (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
    - delayed until we have restructured the make/build process
* define and document testing routines (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
    - delayed until we have restructured the make/build process
* test iCal Server (on G5) (**Børre**)
* remove TOC from the giellatekno home page by using dispatcher (**Trond**)
    - building gtuit with dispatcher doesn't work

# Linguistics

## North Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

## Lule Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

## South Sámi

Adj->verb derivations is the next topic.
Verb -> adj -derivations (some) already written in, tentatively.
This topic probably needs more consideration than A -> V.

**Maja** had a meeting with Ove Lorentz about loan words in sma, and their
proper orthography. It is a complex issue.

**TODO:**
* reformulate the proper noun grammar according to the Trondheim discussions
  (**Maja, Sjur, Thomas, Trond**)
* Prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM (**Maja, Thomas**)
    - placenames (**Maja**)
    - other issues
* finish the umlaut / derivation work (**Thomas, Sjur, Tomi**)
* adjectives (**Maja** with **Thomas, Trond, Sjur**)
    - two competing naming conventions of continuation lexicons
        - One naming goes ATTRSUFF-PREDSUFF-STEMTYPE
        - One follows the sme convention of naming key adjectives
        - There are duplicate lexica
    - The comparative issue open here and there
        - The ATTRSUFF-PREDSUFF-STEMTYPE lexica now go to EVENCOMP and
    ODDCOMP only.

# Name lexicon/risten.no infrastructure

**Tomi** has played with [couchdb](http://couchdb.apache.org/) as a replacement
for eXist in risten.no and general dictionary-related work. Seems much lighter
and easier to work with.

Instead of building our own webforms and back-end update scripts, use XForms
with a premade connection to our xml db. Orbeon XForms is such a tool (open
source).

From the meeting with the terminology and IT teams last week:
* no major rework on the present search interface now
* no work on the editing section; instead:
* add existing lists of sanctioned terminology as separate term entities
* add a dictionary if we can make one with sufficient quality

This means the following tasks:
* find already approved lists, in paper or electronic form (**term team**)
* convert paper lists to electronic lists (**term team**)
* convert lists to standard XML (**Sjur, Tomi**)
* add prepared lists to risten.no (**Sjur, Tomi**)

**TODO:**
1. send eXist log files to Ciprian (**Sjur**)
1. fix i18n bug in risten.no/G5 (so they will work without the proper locale
  request) (**Sjur**)
1. fix bugs in lexc2xml; add comments to the log element (**Saara**)
1. finish first version of the editing (**Sjur**)
1. test editing of the xml files. If ok, then: (**Sjur, Thomas, Trond**)
1. make terms-smX.xml <=== automatically from propernoun-sme-lex.xml (add `nob`
  as well) (the morphological section should be kept intact, in e.g.
  propernoun-sme-morph.txt) (**Sjur, Saara**)
1. convert propernoun-($lang)-lex.txt to a derived file from common xml files
  (**Sjur, Tomi, Saara**)
1. implement data synchronisation between [risten.no](http://www.risten.no) and
  the cvs repo, and possibly other servers (ie the G5 as an alternative server
  to the public risten.no - it might be faster and better suited than the
  official one; also local installations could be treated the same way)
1. start to use the xml file as source file
1. clean terms-sme.xml such that all names have the correct tag for their use
  (e.g. @type=secondary) (**Thomas, linguists**)
1. merge placenames which are errouneously in different entries: e.g. Helsinki,
  Helsingfors, Helsset (**linguists**)
1. publish the name lexicon on risten.no (**Sjur**)
1. add missing parallel names for placenames (**linguists**)
1. add informative links between first names like Niillas and Nils
  (**linguists**)

## Dictionaries

**Ciprian** did some work on Komi, is continuing. The first test version next
Monday.

**TODO:**
* Set up the apache server for the risten.no beta on the linux box + Xserve.
  (**Børre**)
* set up risten.no on eXist/XServe (as a beta version site) (**Sjur**)
* set up required infra for smenob on risten.no/XServe (**Sjur**)
* Continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
* end user documentation (how to download and install) (**Ciprian, Trond**)
* Contact *Davvi Girji* about cooperation on electronic dictionaries
  (**Sjur**)
* developing the mobile phone version of smenob:
    - http://pfed.info/wksite/
* Komi
    - take out the doublets to a separate file (**Ciprian**)
    - merge the doublets (**Jaska, Trond**)
    - start looking at the komfin and komeng MacDicts (**Ciprian**)
    - Completing the automaton to some state (**Trond, Jaska, Paula**)

# Proofing tools

## HFST-based proofing tools

**TODO:**
* continue to write an API specification, and an implementation specification
  (**Sjur**)

## Hunspell

**Børre** has released beta7, with working clitics, negation verb and copula.

## Testing

### Spelling Error Markup

**TODO:**
* test new and nested error markup (**Sjur**)
    - nesting still needs to be tested, depends on new `ccat` feature

### Speller testing

**TODO:**
* test the error type selection feature in ccat (**Sjur**)
* package and deliver `sma` proofing tools (**Sjur, Tomi**)
* add South Sámi DLL's to the svn repository (**Sjur**)

### Testing open-source Norwegian spellers

**Sjur** has invited the open-source group to test their spell-checker using our
test bench. The response has been positive, we'll see what happens.

We should go to their developer meetings, and present our work and how to work
with language technology.

## Speller bugs

List of bugs returned from Polderland:
* 621
* 630
* 652
* 656
* 676

Open issues based on test results:

### sme
Version: **Davvisámi, version 1.1, 2008-12-17**
* 399 - missing numerals (plural forms) - **OPEN**
* 425 - X not recognized; single letters were left out - still **OPEN**
* 435 - roman numbers - inflection of single letter numbers
        rejected, as well as some complex numbers (but is ok in `smj`) - still
        **OPEN**
    - we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
   separate lexicon file
* 595 - prefix+name without hyphen (*ovdaLot* instead of *ovda-Lot*) - still
        **OPEN**
* 603 - suomabealdi accepted - still **OPEN**
* 606 - compound-tags LEXICON VUOHTA - still **OPEN**
* 613 - short gen. as second compound part - still **OPEN**
* 619 - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails - *vihttasoarttat*
        remaining - still **OPEN**
* 629 - *a* taking part in compounding without hyphen - still **OPEN**
    - only open case has word *A-finálaid* compounded
* 642 - noun/adj/proper + hyphen + ain - **FIXED**
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still **OPEN**, open case has uppercase letters
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still **OPEN**
* 709 - **REGRESSION:** sámedikkeválga accepted
* 728 - vowel shortening GenCmp+Left-tagged - still **OPEN**
* 779 - caseforms of pronoun okatahat - **OPEN**
* 785 - does not recognize alphabet-abbr+noun

### smj
Version: **Julevsáme, version 1.1, 2008-12-17**
* 435 - roman number - single letter numbers now recognised
    -      we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
        separate lexicon file
    -      please note that *inflection* of single letter numerals is **fine** in
        `smj`, as opposed to `sme`
* 482 - **REGRESSION:** *polardutkamin* not recognized
* 556 - **REGRESSION:** non-existent word accepted
* 594 - *lågenanguoktáj* not recognized - **OPEN**
* 595 - prefix+name as split comp without hyphen - **FIXED**
* 596 - C-giellan is not accepted - still **OPEN**
* 600 - **REGRESSION:** Gen+hyph compound
* 627 - **REGRESSION:** prefix + hyhpen does not get accepted
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still **OPEN**, open case has uppercase letters
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still **OPEN**
* 650 - noun prefix+name compound without hyphen - **FIXED**
* 652 - UPPERCASE-typos only get acronym-suggestions - still **OPEN**
* 692 - numeral-variants - all but one fixed (*gáktsalågenantjuotakta*), but
        still **OPEN**

**TODO:**
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion (**Tomi**)

## Hyphenator bugs

Open issues based on test results :

### sme
Lexicon version: **Davvisámi, version 1.1, 2008-12-17**
* 468 - *Márkomeanu* - still **OPEN**
* 547 - hyphen in front of vowel: *Lotnolasealáhusas* - still **OPEN**
* 548 - mid syllable hyphenation: *Háliidivččen* - still **OPEN**
* 549 - division without hyph: *Váccedettiin* - still **OPEN**

### smj
Lexicon version: **Julevsáme, version 1.1, 2008-12-17**
* 547 - hyphen in front of vowel: *Jienastimnjuolgadusá* and *Orgánajs* -
        still **OPEN**
* 670 - Hard hyphen replaced with soft hyphen: *10-biejvvásattja* (the word is
        not rec.; Bug #711) - still **OPEN**

**TODO:**
* fix PL hyphenator errors (**Tomi**)

## Installer changes

**TODO:**
* test InDesign installer (**Sjur**)

## User documentation

**TODO:**
* InDesign documentation (**Sjur**)
    - Norwegian translation received from Davvi Girji

## 1.2 release

**Tomi** has started the process - great!

Content:
* several smj bug fixes
* lexicalisations
* InDesign Mac & Win
* new OOo beta
* improved installers, at least for Mac, preferably also for Windows

# Other

## Autumn planning

* divvun/sma -> all
* speller test project -> Sjur, Børre, Thomas, X
* speech synthesis -> Sjur, Trond, BA as a starter
* dictionaries: smanob, komfineng -> Ciprian, Sjur, Trond
* risten.no -> Ciprian, Sjur
* Barents project followup meeting
* Arctic conference - September 24-26 (Formal linguistics meets the north)
* Forskingstorget - September 18-19
* Francis Tyers in town appr. 24.9-1.10 (Lule Saami MT workshop week 39)
* sme and smj tools, next version -> Thomas, Tomi, Sjur
* HFST-based proofing tools -> Sjur
* sma langauge experts meeting, incl. Pia Persson & SGM/SGL

## Text to speech

**TODO:**
* kick-off lunch at wednesday (**Trond**)
* refine syntax / dependency rules (**Biret Ánne**)
* start public tender process (**Sjur**)

## MT and CAT

**TODO:**
* make A-ITE compile and run on Windows (**Ciprian**)

## Open source

The repository is properly closed/open now, and the availability of the source
code should be announced.

**TODO:**
* announce the availability of our repository on relevant linguistic lists
  (**Sjur**)

# Next meeting, closing

The next meeting is 14.9.2009, 9.30 Norwegian time.

The meeting was closed at 11:28.

# Appendix - task lists for the next five days

## Boerre

* update online download log statistics page
* improve XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Draw document
* `gt/Makefile` remake
* Set up the apache server for the risten.no beta on the linux box + Xserve.
* get translations of thank-you letter
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Ciprian

* MT: test Autshumato Alpha version on Windows using Launcher
* transform the Sami Law Terms DB (SLT-DB) into an eXist-usable format
* make eXist running with the SLT-DB
* make a schema/dtd description of the lexC-file (experiment with
  Romanian)
* transform sme-lexC files into XML format
* Bodø Oahpa:
    - generalize for semantic classes and pos
    - implement a login mechanism
    - implement a upload data mechanism
    - setup the Bodø version on victorio
* Sandbox Oahpa:
    - setup the Sandbox version on victorio
* Running Oahpa:
    - Check for IP numbers in the *Oahpa!* log
    - add an Oahpa clock excercise
    - Generate fin/xml/{nouns|verbs|adjectives}.xml, and implement the new Leksa
   dropdown menu
* Komi
    - transform the source format into GT-dict format and generate the first
   dictionary
* restructure and clean the script catalogue, using subdirs
* check the processing of new corpus documents (error logging during conversion,
  conversion quality, documentation, etc.)
* continue the search and testing of an appropriate tool for
  lexicon working (no xml-file editing via text editors!)
* incorporate the passives into the last version of the sme:nob
* continue the work at the Kildin-Russian dictionary
* check all bug in the sma:nob-swe dictionary
* extend the smanobswe dictionary
* fix the bug with the string length in the popup window (sma:nob)
* try to reduce the dict-size on mac: experiment with xPointer, etc.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Maja

* Prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
* more work on `sma` adjectives
* Send **Lena Kappfjell** and **Harald Gaski** a contract
* Send Josef an e:mail - question about book signature from this summer
* Send formal letter to Gerd Pärsson about the book *Eahperestujmie*
* digitize southsámi books
* work with missing lists- southsámi

## Sjur

* @Barents: plan a meeting/seminar with potential cooperation partners
* @Barents: plan for The Real Thing
* @TTS: start public tender process
* make **Leif Åge** send out CD's to distribution points
* start Nordplus Sprog project
* send eXist log files to **Ciprian**
* finalise formal letter to Laila Mattsson-Magga with **Maja**
* Write a formal letter to *Davvi girji* about electronic dictionaries
* package and deliver `sma` proofing tools (with **Tomi**)
* make XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
* continue to write a proofing API & implementation specification
* name db/risten.no
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
* support and maintenance contract for `sme` and `smj`, MS+Adobe tools
* Sámi languages as part of *Norsk språkbank*
* set up risten.no on eXist/XServe (as a beta version site)
* set up required infra for smenob on risten.no/XServe
* `sma` umlaut / derivation work
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Thomas
* prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
* `sma` adjectives
* Digitalize south saami books
* finish reformulating the proper noun grammar like the verbs
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Tomi
* add missing Finnish translations in sme/xml/nouns.xml
* fix screen sharing problem on **Maja's** computer
* package and deliver `sma` proofing tools (with **Sjur**)
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
* fix double hyphen bugs
* fix PL hyphenator bugs
* fix PL and Hunspell conversion bugs
* infrastructure remake
* `sma` umlaut / derivation work
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond

* add missing Finnish translations in sme/xml/nouns.xml
* @Barents: plan a meeting/seminar with potential cooperation partners
* @Barents: plan for The Real Thing
* @TTS: kick-off lunch at wednesday
* make Lene et al run the gtsetup.sh script
* Mikogo for Lene and Linda
* Komi
    - merge the doublets
    - Completing the automaton to some state
* `sma` proper noun grammar (with the rest of the sma gang)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
