# Meeting setup

* Date: 26.10.2009
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Internet
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat

# Agenda

Cf. one of the following, depending on context:
* the upper bar of the SEE window (provided you use the JSPWiki syntax mode)
* the TOC in Forrest-rendered output, like HTML and PDF

# Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 09:54.

Present:
**Børre, Maja, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi, Trond**

Absent: **Ciprian**

Agenda accepted as is.

# Updated task status since last meeting

## Børre
* order scanners (one book and one flatbed with sheet feeder)
* static i18n divvun site
    - up and running, no lang change yet
* upgrade the XServe to Snow Leopard Server
    - hasn't arrived yet from **Eplehuset**
* improve XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Draw document
    - not done
* `gt/Makefile` remake
    - brief meeting on friday
* get translations of thank-you letter
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
* other:
    - training tesseract to learn North and Lule Sami

## Ciprian
* MT - Autshumato:
    - test Autshumato Alpha version on Windows using Launcher
    - make Autshumato run on Mac
* eXist:
    - make eXist running with the SLT-DB
* infrastructure
    - make a schema/dtd description of the lexC-file (experiment with
  Komi and Romanian)
    - transform sme-lexC files into XML format
* GT web:
    - coloring output of the disambiguation
    - add a tree visualizer for the dependency trees
* Bodø Oahpa:
    - generalize for semantic classes and pos
    - implement a login mechanism
    - implement a upload data mechanism
    - setup the Bodø version on victorio
* Sandbox Oahpa:
    - finish the db installation for sb_oahpa
    - implement and test the Finnish lemmata (and if it works transfer it to the official OAHPA implementation)
* Running Oahpa:
    - add an Oahpa clock and date excercise (cf. Numra)
    - Generate fin/xml/{nouns|verbs|adjectives}.xml, and implement the new Leksa
   dropdown menu (but first run the sb_oahpa test)
* Lovozero Oahpa:
    - check the installation of MySQL, python, and Django on **Lene** and/or **Trond** machine
    - implement a simple Leksa version for sjd
* KomEngFin:
    - split by pos and transform the actual format into gt_dict format
    - compile only one version of dictionary and use css for user preferences
    - generate the first StarDict version of komeng and komfin dictionary
    - test the automatic sorting by Komi alphabet in xsl (as discussed
   with **Trond**)
* SmeNob:
    - the StarDict on Windows: try the HTML-plugin
    - try to reduce the dict-size on mac: experiment with xPointer, etc.
    - incorporate the passives into the last version of the sme:nob
* SmaNobSwe:
    - extend the smanobswe dictionary
    - check all bug in the sma:nob-swe dictionary
    - fix the bug with the string length in the popup window (sma:nob)
* SmjNob:
    - start working at a Lule-Sami based on Bruce Moren's data
* SjdRus:
    - continue the work at the Kildin-Russian dictionary, next internal deadline is
   the lexicography workshop in November 2009 in Tromsø
* Corpus:
    - check the processing of new corpus documents (error logging during
   conversion, conversion quality, documentation, etc.)

## Maja
* work meeting on loan words and proper nouns, this week - tomorrow?
    - to do
* Proofread a text with tre eror$error notation
    - done, but maybe I had to take a look at
* Prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
    - to do
* more work on `sma` adjectives
    - done
* contact Turi Aleksandersen about book signature follow-up from Joseph
    - she is on work this week, will call her again
* contact authors of `sma` aticles in 9-10 eds. of the yearbook
  *Åarjel-saemieh*
    - made a list - and will contact writers (and maybe send out some letters)

## Sjur
* work meeting on loan words and proper nouns, this week - tomorrow?
* HFST feedback: CG-friendly formatting, to get rid of the lookup2cg script
    - done, HFST now has these options, but with some bugs - see latest svn
* fix the installer build issues
    - not yet done
* @Barents: plan a meeting/seminar with potential cooperation partners
* @Barents: plan for The Real Thing
* @TTS: start public tender process
    - not done
* make **Leif Åge** send out CD's to distribution points
    - still needs to remind him. The address list has fallen off the web because it
   wasn't linked to.
* start Nordplus Sprog project
    - not done, should really be done now
* send eXist log files to **Ciprian**
    - not done
* Write a formal letter to *Davvi girji* about electronic dictionaries
    - not done
* package and deliver `sma` proofing tools (with **Tomi**)
    - first and second alpha done
* make XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
    - nothing done
* continue to write a proofing API & implementation specification
    - nothing written last week
* name db/risten.no
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
* support and maintenance contract for `sme` and `smj`, MS+Adobe tools
* Sámi languages as part of *Norsk språkbank*
* set up risten.no on eXist/XServe (as a beta version site)
    - eXist has developed so much since last time that it is a major effort to get
   it up and running again :(
* set up required infra for smenob on risten.no/XServe
    - started in Tromsø, not finished
* find and contact the correct person in SD, to get the manuscript for all Sámi
  teaching material now being given out to the schools
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
* other things:
    - worked on Hfst bugs, compilation, tried to compile sme transducer with the
   latest source files, no success though
    - made a twolc modus for SEE
    - letter to iFinger salesperson with Trond
    - bureaucrazy
    - make remake discussion

## Thomas
* work meeting on loan words and proper nouns, this week - tomorrow?
    - not yet
* Go through the sma phonrules file
    - done
* Pick a text for proofreading
    - done, but not finished yet
* prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
    - worked
* `sma` adjectives
    - worked
* Digitalize south saami books
    - worked
* finish reformulating the proper noun grammar like the verbs
    - not yet
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - much work done on south sami linguistic bugs

## Tomi
* Compile a new version after some dust has settled (date fixed?)
    - done sma
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
    - not done
* fix double hyphen bugs
    - not done
* fix PL `smj` hyphenator bug
    - not done
* fix PL and Hunspell conversion bugs
    - worked
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond
* work meeting on loan words and proper nouns, this week - tomorrow?
    - Meeting not held, but much `sma` work outside meetings.
* HFST feedback: CG-friendly formatting, to get rid of the lookup2cg script
    - Participated in letter.
* Mikogo for Lene and Linda
    - Not yet.
* Komi
    - Completing the automaton to some state
        - Done.
* `sma` proper noun grammar (with the rest of the sma gang)
    - Done, but not in the team.
* sma hyphens
    - Done some, completed gold standard with Maja.
    - It turned out the analysis we looked at last time was with the wrong
   rule set (with phon-hyph + morph-hyph, and not with phon-hyph only, as
   I errouneously assumed). Thus the hyph rules are not as bad as they
   looked last week.
* clock and date for Numra
    - Nothing on clock and date. Other Opha work, though.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).

# Oahpa!

**Ciprian** has now set up Oahpa! for Kildin Sámi, both as a playground and test
bed and for the Lovozero week.

Meeting memos can be found at
[http://giellatekno.uit.no/ped/index.html#Meeting+memos]

**TODO**
* Register oahpa.no (**Trond**)
* Generate fin/xml/{nouns|verbs|adjectives}.xml, and implement the new Leksa
  dropdown menu (**Ciprian**).
* clock and date for Numra (**Trond, Ciprian**).

# Corpus gathering

**Thomas** is proofreading OCR results. **Maja** has made a list of yearbook
articles (with authors) written in `sma`. Will contact them. Only writers will
be asked for permission to use the text, not tellers. **Børre** is trying to get
in touch with **Harald Gaski** to get his signature.

**TODO:**
* Which books are digitized?
    - These books should be OCR'ed/digitized: Anna Jacobsens books
  *Don jih dan bïjre I-III*, *Jupmele rïjhke lea gietskesne*,
  *Luste lohkedh*, *Duedtie Novrlaantesne*, *Naestie-tjoevkesne*,
  *Gullie-tjååtsele*.
    - Its not digitized yet, should do it this week.
  A. Jacobsen: *Goltelidh jih soptestidh* and *Mojhtesh* are already
  in electronic form
    - use the corpus gathering document to keep track of each book
* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts (**Maja**)
    - get `sma` articles in Š-bláđđi
    - the Gun Utsi book is almost there - one contract missing (**Maja**)
* read formal letter to Laila Mattsson-Magga by David (**Sjur**)
    - suspended - this is less and less relevant now
* write formal letter to Davvi Girji (**Sjur**)
* send a copy of the signed contracts back to the authors, translators and
  publishers, accompanied by the thank-you letter
* find and contact the correct person in SD, to get the manuscript for all Sámi
  teaching material now being given out to the schools (**Sjur**)
* get the `sma` yearbooks from *Saemien sïjhte* (**Maja**)

# Promoting Divvun

**TODO:**
* make leaflet to inform about the project (**Børre**)
    - add InDesign text (**Sjur**)
    - make XSL script to transform Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
   (**Børre, Sjur**)
* distribute CD version through the library bus, the language centres and common
  sami centres in all of Sápmi. Gaaltije in Östersund for example.
  (**Leif Åge, Sjur**)
    - make him send out CD's accordingly (**Sjur**)
* update online download log statistics page (**Børre**)

# Future plans, directions and ideas

See a separate document in `plan/strat/5year.jspwiki`.

## Northern areas project

**TODO:**
* Attend a beginners' course in Russian (priority: the alphabet!) near you..
* plan a meeting/seminar with potential cooperation partners (**Trond, Sjur**)
* plan for The Real Thing (**Trond, Sjur**)

# Infrastructure

**Trond** and **Børre** have worked a lot to add Kildin Sámi and Komi to the
Giellatekno home page, and found several bugs and problems at the same time.
Please have a look at the new version.

Hfst regex support is not there yet.

To accomodate future enhancements in different directions (in rough order of
importance):

1. test bench for all parts of our language technology efforts
    1. test bench enhanced, but not yet complet
1. set up the Leopard Server features for collaborative support:
    1. permanent chat rooms
    1. stored (and indexed) chat transcripts of the chat rooms
    1. iCal server / group calendars
    1. wiki
1. wiki? on G5 (is part of Leopard Server) or other web-based documentation
1. improve Forrest stability and i18n support ( the divvun crashes)
    1. **Sjur** has been working on better i18n and pdf rendering
    1. **Børre** has some ideas for getting back to serving static html files
1. reorganise the documentation:
    1. differ between target groups
    1. get better grouping
    1. decide what to write in forrest and what in wiki
   (cf. [Apertium](http://www.apertium.org/) and
   [http://xixona.dlsi.ua.es/apertium/]) for a similar split)
    1. update/add missing parts
1. migrate lexc lexicons to XML, splitting the task
    1. Name lexica (the Name project)
    1. Dictionaries (already in XML, task is to integrate them)
    1. At least migrate the lexc open POSes (Komi as a pilot case)
1. change the look of the documentation web
1. use HFST as alternative to XFST
    1. this is now a real option (HFST2 is released), reqiures Makefile enhancements
1. corpus content moved to Max Planck repositories? Norsk språkbank?
1. update infrastructure to allow content-restricted spellers for special target
  groups

**TODO:**
* HFST feedback: CG-friendly formatting, to get rid of the lookup2cg script
  (**Sjur, Trond**)
    - done, formatting options now added.
* Order a new MacBook Pro to Maja (**Børre**)
    - the old one could be used for (Windows) testing or similar
* upgrade the XServe to Snow Leopard Server (**Børre**)
* ask Lene, Linda to install Mikogo (**Trond**)
* restructure and clean the script catalogue, using subdirs to categorise the
  scripts (**Ciprian**)
    - see posting in the news group
* infrastructure remake: (**Børre, Ciprian, Saara, Sjur, Tomi, Trond**)
    - more modularised make / build infra (prepare for smn, sms, sjd, others)
    - merge gt, kt and st into one
    - modularised preprocess and spellrelax
    - alternatives to make:
        - [SCons](http://www.scons.org/)
        - [makepp](http://makepp.sourceforge.net/)
        - [Maven](http://maven.apache.org/) (for java-projects)
        - [CMake](http://www.cmake.org/)
* make a test-all target that runs all tests we have (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
    - delayed until we have restructured the make/build process
* define and document testing routines (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
    - delayed until we have restructured the make/build process

# Linguistics

## North Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

## Lule Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

## South Sámi

The linguistic part of the speller works quite ok. But there are of course things that are not working yet. Main linguistic bugs in the speller:
* loan words missing en masse
* names
* the æøäö business is quite frustrating

**TODO:**
* Prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM (**Maja, Thomas**)
* adjectives (**Maja** with **Thomas, Trond, Sjur**)
    - two competing naming conventions of continuation lexicons
        - One naming goes ATTRSUFF-PREDSUFF-STEMTYPE
        - One follows the sme convention of naming key adjectives
        - There are duplicate lexica
    - The comparative issue open here and there
        - The ATTRSUFF-PREDSUFF-STEMTYPE lexica now go to EVENCOMP and
    ODDCOMP only.
* work meeting on loan words and proper nouns, this week - tomorrow?
  (**Maja, Ove (?), Sjur, Thomas, Trond**)

# Name lexicon/risten.no infrastructure

**Tomi** has played with [couchdb](http://couchdb.apache.org/) as a replacement
for eXist in risten.no and general dictionary-related work. Seems much lighter
and easier to work with.

Instead of building our own webforms and back-end update scripts, use XForms
with a premade connection to our xml db. Orbeon XForms is such a tool (open
source).

From the meeting with the terminology and IT teams last week:
* no major rework on the present search interface now
* no work on the editing section; instead:
* add existing lists of sanctioned terminology as separate term entities
* add a dictionary if we can make one with sufficient quality

This means the following tasks:
* find already approved lists, in paper or electronic form (**term team**)
* convert paper lists to electronic lists (**term team**)
* convert lists to standard XML (**Sjur, Tomi**)
* add prepared lists to risten.no (**Sjur, Tomi**)

**TODO:**
1. send eXist log files to Ciprian (**Sjur**)
1. fix i18n bug in risten.no/G5 (so they will work without the proper locale
  request) (**Sjur**)
1. fix bugs in lexc2xml; add comments to the log element (**Saara**)
1. finish first version of the editing (**Sjur**)
1. test editing of the xml files. If ok, then: (**Sjur, Thomas, Trond**)
1. make terms-smX.xml <=== automatically from propernoun-sme-lex.xml (add `nob`
  as well) (the morphological section should be kept intact, in e.g.
  propernoun-sme-morph.txt) (**Sjur, Saara**)
1. convert propernoun-($lang)-lex.txt to a derived file from common xml files
  (**Sjur, Tomi, Saara**)
1. implement data synchronisation between [risten.no](http://www.risten.no) and
  the cvs repo, and possibly other servers (ie the G5 as an alternative server
  to the public risten.no - it might be faster and better suited than the
  official one; also local installations could be treated the same way)
1. start to use the xml file as source file
1. clean terms-sme.xml such that all names have the correct tag for their use
  (e.g. @type=secondary) (**Thomas, linguists**)
1. merge placenames which are errouneously in different entries: e.g. Helsinki,
  Helsingfors, Helsset (**linguists**)
1. publish the name lexicon on risten.no (**Sjur**)
1. add missing parallel names for placenames (**linguists**)
1. add informative links between first names like Niillas and Nils
  (**linguists**)

## Dictionaries

**TODO:**
* set up risten.no on eXist/XServe (as a beta version site) (**Sjur**)
* set up required infra for smenob on risten.no/XServe (**Sjur**)
* Continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
* end user documentation (how to download and install) (**Ciprian, Trond**)
* Contact *Davvi Girji* about cooperation on electronic dictionaries
  (**Sjur**)
* developing the mobile phone version of smenob:
    - http://pfed.info/wksite/
* Komi
    - take out the doublets to a separate file (**Ciprian**)
    - merge the doublets (**Jaska, Trond**)
    - start looking at the komfin and komeng MacDicts (**Ciprian**)
    - Completing the automaton to some state (**Trond, Jaska, Paula**)

# Proofing tools

## South Sámi second alpha

Maja:
* looks good:)
* some words are written correct, but the speller rejects them

Trond:
* a frequent bug was nubpie because of a wrong tag
* speller - analyser diff

Thomas:
* the phonetic rules seem to work no

Tomi:
* baseform test is checking whether the baseforms are recognised by the speller

**TODO:**
* Go through the phonrules file (**Thomas**)
* Pick a text for proofreading (**Thomas**)
* Proofread a text with tre eror$error notation (**Maja**)
* difftest for fst and PL speller (**Sjur**)
* Compile a new version by Friday (**Tomi**)
* Look for external beta testers?
    - David and Jovsset will get the speller, for other people
   we must wait.
* fix the installer build issues (**Sjur**)
* correct easter egg to say "South Sámi", not "North Sámi" (**Sjur**)

## HFST-based proofing tools

**TODO:**
* continue to write an API specification, and an implementation specification
  (**Sjur**)

## Testing

### Spelling Error Markup

**TODO:**
* test new and nested error markup (**Sjur**)
    - nesting still needs to be tested, depends on new `ccat` feature

### Speller testing

**TODO:**
* test the error type selection feature in ccat (**Sjur**)
* package and deliver `sma` proofing tools (**Sjur, Tomi**)
    - done, but installer is not yet working
* add South Sámi DLL's to the svn repository (**Sjur**)
    - done

### Testing open-source Norwegian spellers

**Sjur** has invited the open-source group to test their spell-checker using our
test bench. The response has been positive, we'll see what happens.

We should go to their developer meetings, and present our work and how to work
with language technology.

## Speller bugs

List of bugs returned from Polderland:
* 621
* 630
* 652
* 656
* 676

Tag reordering for abbreviations have caused a lot of problems:

```
smj:
hr.
hr.	hr+ABBR+Acc
cand.philol.
cand.philol.	cand.philol+ABBR+N+Acc
Per
Per	Per+N+Prop+Mal+Sg+Attr

sme:
hr.
hr.	hr+N+ABBR+Acc
Per
Per	Per+N+Prop+Mal+Sg+Attr
```

Open issues based on test results:

### sme
Version: **Davvisámi, version 1.2, 2009-09-18**
* 399 - missing numerals (plural forms) - still **OPEN**
* 425 - X not recognised; single letters were left out - still **OPEN**
* 435 - roman numbers - inflection of single letter numbers
        rejected, as well as some complex numbers (but is ok in `smj`) - still
        **OPEN**
    - we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
   separate lexicon file
* 461 - **REGRESSION:** missing suggestion (sáhkki)
* 508 - **REGRESSION:** accepts smj entries (most likely abbreviation missing)
* 520 - **REGRESSION:** r9 and š9 not defined (abbr. missing)
* 595 - prefix+name without hyphen (*ovdaLot* instead of *ovda-Lot*) - still
        **OPEN**
* 603 - suomabealdi accepted - still **OPEN**
* 606 - compound-tags LEXICON VUOHTA - still **OPEN**
* 613 - short gen. as second compound part - still **OPEN**
* 619 - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails - *vihttasoarttat*
        remaining - still **OPEN**
* 629 - *a* taking part in compounding without hyphen - still **OPEN**
    - only open case has word *A-finálaid* compounded
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still **OPEN**, open case has uppercase letters
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still **OPEN**
* 661 - **REGRESSION:** abbr. not recognized
* 709 - sámedikkeválga accepted - **OPEN**
* 728 - vowel shortening GenCmp+Left-tagged - still **OPEN**
* 779 - caseforms of pronoun okatahat - still **OPEN**
* 785 - does not recognize alphabet-abbr+noun - **OPEN**
* 802 - **NEW:** multiword propernouns
* 803 - **NEW:** FINJU- words accepted single-handed
* 804 - **NEW:** guovttilogát, njealjilogát
* 805 - **NEW:** Nouns+acronyms

### smj
Version: **Julevsáme, version 1.2, 2009-09-20**
* 435 - roman number - single letter numbers now recognised
    -      we should pre-generate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
        separate lexicon file
    -      please note that *inflection* of single letter numerals is **fine** in
        `smj`, as opposed to `sme`
* 482 - *polardutkamin* not recognized - **FIXED**
* 496 - **REGRESSION:** unrecognised clitics
* 556 - non-existent word accepted - **FIXED**
* 594 - *lågenanguoktáj* not recognized - still **OPEN**
* 595 - **REGRESSION:** prefix+name as split comp without hyphen
* 596 - C-giellan is not accepted - still **OPEN**
* 600 - Gen+hyph compound - **FIXED**
* 627 - prefix + hyhpen does not get accepted - **FIXED**
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still **OPEN**, open case has uppercase letters
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still **OPEN**
* 650 - **REGRESSION:** noun prefix+name compound without hyphen
* 652 - UPPERCASE-typos only get acronym-suggestions - still **OPEN**
* 692 - numeral-variants - all but one fixed (*gáktsalågenantjuotakta*), but
        still **OPEN**
* 744 - **REGRESSION:** numerals + clitic
* 803 - **NEW:** VINJU- words accepted single-handed
* 805 - **NEW:** Nouns+acronyms

**TODO:**
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion (**Tomi**)

## Hyphenator bugs

Open issues based on test results :

### sme
Lexicon version: **Davvisámi, version 1.2, 2009-09-18**

No known issues!

### smj
Lexicon version: **Julevsáme, version 1.2, 2009-09-20**
* 670 - Hard hyphen replaced with soft hyphen: *10-biejvvásattja* (the word is
        not rec.; Bug #711) - still **OPEN**

### sma

Command to test the hyphenator:

```
preprocess dev/corp/pressemelding.txt | lookup bin/hyph-sma.fst | cut -f2 | \
lookup bin/hyphrules-sma.fst | grep -v '^$' | cut -f2 | uniq | see
```

**TODO:**
* fix PL hyphenator errors (**Tomi**)
    - almost done - one `smj` bug left

## Installer changes

**TODO:**
* test InDesign installer (**Sjur**)

## User documentation

**TODO:**
* InDesign documentation (**Sjur**)
    - Norwegian translation received from Davvi Girji

## 1.2 release

Content:
* several smj bug fixes
* lexicalisations
* InDesign Mac & Win
* new OOo beta
* improved installers, at least for Mac, preferably also for Windows

# Other

## Autumn planning

* speller test project -> Sjur, Børre, Thomas, X
* speech synthesis -> Sjur, Trond, BA as a starter
* dictionaries: smanob, komfineng, fkvnob -> Ciprian, Sjur, Trond
* risten.no -> Ciprian, Sjur, Tomi
* Barents project follow-up meeting
* sme and smj proofing tools, next version -> Thomas, Tomi, Sjur
* HFST-based proofing tools -> Sjur

## Text to speech

**TODO:**
* refine syntax / dependency rules (**Biret Ánne**)
* start public tender process (**Sjur**)
* meeting with HU Wednesday 28.10.2008
  (**Antti, Biret Ánne, Martti, Sjur, Trond**)

## MT and CAT

**TODO:**
* make A-ITE compile and run on Windows (**Ciprian**)

## Open source

The repository is properly closed/open now, and the availability of the source
code should be announced.

**TODO:**
* announce the availability of our repository on relevant linguistic lists
  (**Sjur**)

# Next meeting, closing

The next meeting is 2.11.2009, 9.30 Norwegian time.

The meeting was closed at 11:25.

# Appendix - task lists for the next week

## Boerre

* order scanners (one book and one flatbed with sheet feeder)
* implement language switch for static divvun site
* upgrade the XServe to Snow Leopard Server
* improve XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Draw document
* `gt/Makefile` remake
* get translations of thank-you letter
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Ciprian

* MT - Autshumato:
    - test Autshumato Alpha version on Windows using Launcher
    - make Autshumato run on Mac
* eXist:
    - make eXist running with the SLT-DB
* infrastructure
    - make a schema/dtd description of the lexC-file (experiment with
  Komi and Romanian)
    - transform sme-lexC files into XML format
* GT web:
    - coloring output of the disambiguation
    - add a tree visualizer for the dependency trees
* Bodø Oahpa:
    - generalize for semantic classes and pos
    - implement a login mechanism
    - implement a upload data mechanism
    - setup the Bodø version on victorio
* Sandbox Oahpa:
    - finish the db installation for sb_oahpa
    - implement and test the Finnish lemmata (and if it works transfer it to the official OAHPA implementation)
* Running Oahpa:
    - add an Oahpa clock and date excercise (cf. Numra)
    - Generate fin/xml/{nouns|verbs|adjectives}.xml, and implement the new Leksa
   dropdown menu (but first run the sb_oahpa test)
* Lovozero Oahpa:
    - check the installation of MySQL, python, and Django on **Lene** and/or **Trond** machine
    - implement a simple Leksa version for sjd
* KomEngFin:
    - split by pos and transform the actual format into gt_dict format
    - compile only one version of dictionary and use css for user preferences
    - generate the first StarDict version of komeng and komfin dictionary
    - test the automatic sorting by Komi alphabet in xsl (as discussed
   with **Trond**)
* SmeNob:
    - the StarDict on Windows: try the HTML-plugin
    - try to reduce the dict-size on mac: experiment with xPointer, etc.
    - incorporate the passives into the last version of the sme:nob
* SmaNobSwe:
    - extend the smanobswe dictionary
    - check all bug in the sma:nob-swe dictionary
    - fix the bug with the string length in the popup window (sma:nob)
* SmjNob:
    - start working at a Lule-Sami based on Bruce Moren's data
* SjdRus:
    - continue the work at the Kildin-Russian dictionary, next internal deadline is
   the lexicography workshop in November 2009 in Tromsø
* Corpus:
    - check the processing of new corpus documents (error logging during
   conversion, conversion quality, documentation, etc.)

## Maja

* work meeting on loan words and proper nouns
* Prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
* more work on `sma` adjectives
* contact Turi Aleksandersen about book signature follow-up from Joseph
* contact authors of `sma` aticles in 9-10 eds. of the yearbook
  *Åarjel-saemieh*

## Sjur

* difftest for fst and PL speller
* correct easter egg to say "South Sámi", not "North Sámi" -> Åarjelsaemien
* meeting with HU Wednesday 28.10.2008
* fix the `sma` installer build issues
* @Barents: plan a meeting/seminar with potential cooperation partners
* @Barents: plan for The Real Thing
* @TTS: start public tender process
* make **Leif Åge** send out CD's to distribution points
* start Nordplus Sprog project
* send eXist log files to **Ciprian**
* Write a formal letter to *Davvi girji* about electronic dictionaries
* make XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
* continue to write a proofing API & implementation specification
* name db/risten.no
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
* support and maintenance contract for `sme` and `smj`, MS+Adobe tools
* Sámi languages as part of *Norsk språkbank*
* set up risten.no on eXist/XServe (as a beta version site)
* set up required infra for smenob on risten.no/XServe
* find and contact the correct person in SD, to get the manuscript for all Sámi
  teaching material now being given out to the schools
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Thomas
* work meeting on loan words and proper nouns
* prepare text´s about normativity issue to SGL/SGM
* `sma` adjectives
* Digitalize south saami books
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Tomi
* Compile a new version after some dust has settled (thursday noon)
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
* fix double hyphen bugs
* fix PL `smj` hyphenator bug
* fix PL and Hunspell conversion bugs
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond

* work meeting on loan words and proper nouns
* Mikogo for Lene and Linda
* clock and date for Numra
* Register oahpa.no (**Trond**)
* meeting with HU Wednesday 28.10.2008
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
