# Meeting setup

* Date: 16.3.2009
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Internet
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat

# Agenda

Cf. one of the following, depending on context:
* the upper bar of the SEE window (provided you use the JSPWiki syntax mode)
* the TOC in Forrest-rendered output, like HTML and PDF

# Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 10:10.

Present:
**Børre, Ciprian, David, Maja, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi, Trond**

Absent: **Jovsset**

Agenda accepted as is.

# Updated task status since last meeting

## Børre
* Implement new version of giellatekno front page without ToC
    - Not done
* improve OOo instructions for leaflet
    - Done
* leaflet: add Linux info
    - Not done
* `gt/Makefile` remake
    - Not done
* Set up the apache server for the risten.no beta on the linux box + Xserve.
* add sound to screencast of using our tools
    - not done
* make a document for listing all gathered texts, with the collection history
    - done
* leaflet meeting on Wednesday at 9.30 Norw. time (with **Jovsset, Sjur**)
    - done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Ciprian
* close the open SVN repository at requested paths
    - todo (still?) - absolutely:)
* improve processing of new corpus documents
    - todo
* make the pipeline of *StarDict* dictionary generation running on the Mac
    - todo (however, there are still many questions related with the use of
   StarDict, as pointed to **Trond, Lene**)
* take care of the error logging during conversion process
    - todo
* look at the xml conversion quality
    - todo
* make a list of (general and special) problems related with
  converting docs into xml-forat and adding them to the corpora
    - todo
* continue the search and testing of an appropriate tool for
  lexicon working (no xml-file editing via text editors!)
    - intensively done: but still having the dilemma to implement something new or
   not?
* build the sami-week-version of sme:nob in all formats
    - re-working the new enhancements as discussed with **Trond, Lene**
* finish the sma:nob-swe dictionary
    - done (but I have to check a possible bug)
* try the first usable GraphViz picture for the make re-make goal
    - done, but some preprocessing of makefile is necessary
* start learning Objective C (without objection ;-))
    - done, but I think that I will implement the tool in Java
   (after discussions with **Trond**)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - todo

## David
* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts
* stay in touch with UmU about c-thesises in south sami
    - given info to two of the students
* Translate light version contract to swedish
    - done, I think..
* contact the sami radio about older manuscrips
    - not done, a little bit sceptic to that Ristin Persson will agree to that
* call **Anne-Grethe Bientie** and **Bierna Bientie** about bible texts
    - not done
* call Š-blađđi about south saami texts
    - contacted š-blađđi, they sent me do idut.
* reupload the *Dejpeladtje muvhth vätnoeh jih vuekie* text, which is
  corrected, into the corpus repository
    - done
* prepare to go to Røyrvik and promote Dåvvome
    - preliminary date for Røyrvik is april 5
* make a document for the SGL/SGM, `sma` section
* `sma` abbreviations in the SGM document
* `sma` adjectives
    - not done
* go to Trondheim
    - signed up for the conferens and probably will get time on the agenda for a
   Divvun-presentation.

## Jovsset
* get the list of verbs from the auhtors of*Verbh*.
* Find a suitable infrastructure for the distribution of the CD version.
  Possible  through the library bus, the language centres and common
  sami centres in all of Sápmi.
* write formal letter to translator of *Gåessie dah jeatjebh åerieminie*
* leaflet: review the Windows pictures, and usage instructions for MS Office.
  Review especially the select sami language part.
* Write installation instructions for word 2003
* better Windows usage descriptions, with emphasis on the pitfalls
* Work with the Leaflet, deadline next monday 16.03.2009
* `sma` placenames in SGM document
* leaflet meeting on Wednesday at 9.30 Norw. time (with **Børre, Sjur**)

## Per-Eric
* follow-up contract from **Lena Davidsson**
* Call **Gøran Matias Andersen** about his `smj` texts
* work with missing lists
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Maja
* contact NRK Nord-Trøndelag about recordings in `sma` and broadcast
  manuscripts
    - waiting - NRK Nord-Trøndelag hasn´t any broadcast manuscript, we need to ask the south-sami juornalists
* more work on `sma` adjectives
    - done
* Send Åsta Vangberg a contract
    - waiting - Waiting for the contracts from Fritz Jacobsen
* Send Lena Kappfjell and Harald Gaski a contract
    - waiting - Waiting for the contracts from Fritz Jacobsen
* Send Sig-Britt Pärsson a contract -
    - David contacts her
* Need to start programming- fresh up/learn to program adjektives and verbs
    - not done - working with adjectivs and werbs

## Saara
* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* Set up ways of adding meta-information for proofing correct corpus docs
  (source info, used in testing or not, added to lexicon or not)

## Sjur
* name db/risten.no
    - TBD
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
    - TBD
* InDesign documentation
    - TBD
* continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (with **Ciprian, Trond**)
    - TBD
* Contact *Davvi Girji* about cooperation on electronic dictionaries
    - TBD
* subcontractor work for `sma` proofing tools
    - almost done, just waiting for the last documents before signing the contract
* support and maintenance contract for `sme` and `smj`, MS+Adobe tools
    - still waiting for an answer to our latest mail
* Sámi languages as part of *Norsk språkbank*
    - waiting for feedback
* contact MS Nordic, and ask them to include the Divvun tools in the next Office
  releases
    - discussed with Audun, there's no response at MS at the moment. We'll drop it
   for now, but possibly return to it later.
* leaflet: add link to OOo installation and usage instructions
    - done
* leaflet: add InDesign text
    - not done, needs to be updated to reflect the new installer
* set up risten.no on eXist/XServe (as a beta version site)
    - TBD
* set up required infra for smenob on risten.no/XServe
    - TBD
* `sma` umlaut / derivation work
    - TBD
* leaflet meeting on Wednesday at 9.30 Norw. time (with **Jovsset, Børre**)
    - done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - TBD
* other issues:
    - meeting **Kimmo Koskenniemi** and **Krister Lindén** at Helsinki university
   about developing a proofing library based on the HFST technology. A good
   meeting, but a lot to do.

## Thomas
* `sma` umlaut / derivation work
    - added lgidh-derivation + discussions with south sami lingvists, no umlaut this week however
* `sma` adjectives
    - started to sort the S-NULL-EVEN:s
* finish reformulating the proper noun grammar like the verbs
    - not yet
* check leaflet once more
    - done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - nothing this week

## Tomi
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
    - not done
* fix double hyphen bugs
    - not done
* fix PL hyphenator bugs
    - not done
* fix PL and Hunspell conversion bugs
    - not done
* infrastructure remake
    - worked a bit
* `sma` umlaut / derivation work
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond
* Register oahpa.no
    - Not done
* end user documentation (how to download and install) - dictionaries
    - Done (still room for improvement!)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).

# Pedagogical software online

Meeting memos can be found at
[http://giellatekno.uit.no/ped/index.html]

Working on making the ped transducers more flexible and forgiving on user input,
and at the same time reporting errors to the users.

ped-sme.fst union of sme.fst and errprop.fst
further: sme.fst | errprop.fst | nolongA.fst | ... (!)

* tag the casedrop, tag the missing á in sme.fst
* drop case, remove á
* The minigrammar is now more detailed than Nickel in several cases.
* Many technical updates the last weeks
* Our bilingual lexicon is now trilingual: Finnish as well, this has not been
  installed yet.

18 000 hits the first month, *not* including Sahka and Vasta.

**TODO**
* Register oahpa.no (**Trond**)
* Include Vasta and Sahka in the log (**Saara**)
* Check for IP numbers in the log (**Trond**)
* Improve the fst handling (**Trond**)

# Corpus gathering

Maja sent out some contracts last week.

**TODO:**
* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts (**David, Jovsset**)
    - older sámi radio texts would be very welcome as well (**David**)
    - **Maja:** NRK Nord-Trøndelag has a lot of recordings in `sma`, possibly
   also manuscripts - we should call them. We should wait, because I think they
   haven´t any manuscripts. We should talk to the south-sámi journalisth in NRK
   Sámeradio about manuskripts. We have allready Anna Jacobsen manuscripts,
   perhaps Anna Granefjell do have some? Sig-Britt Pärsson? Ristin Pärsson?
   Kjell Roger Appfjell? (**Maja**)
    - call Fylkesmannen i Nordland about `sma` material (**Maja**)
    - send **Fritz Jakobssen** a contract (**Maja**)
        - he has received the contract, and will return it soon.
    - send **Nora Marie Brandsfjell** a contract (**Maja**)
        - Sent
    - Š-bláđđi has some articles in `sma`, we should ask for permission to use it
   (**David**)
        - **David** has talked to them, will make a contract with them and **Iđut**
    - follow up on the `sma` Bible translations (**David**)
    - the Gun Utsi book is almost there - one contract missing (**Jovsset**)
* other contacts: Lena Davidsson, daughter to Lars-Matto Tuolja
* make a 1-page, light version of the contract, also in Swedish
  (**Børre, David, Sjur, Trond**)
    - done several weeks ago
* discuss infra improvements for corpus rep administration (**Børre, Ciprian**)
    - delayed till we are done with the `gt/Makefile` improvements
* make a document for listing all gathered texts, with the collection history
  (**Børre**)
    - done, found at `gtsvn/xtdoc/sd/src/documentation/content/xdocs/adm/legal/writers-and-books.xml`
    - one big file
    - collector (initials)
    - date of each contact with authors, translators, publisher, with a short note
   on what was discussed
    - date of signed contract arriving at SD
    - ref. number (archive number) of the contract
    - title - key
    - author(s) - key
    - meta info:
        - title - key
        - author(s) - key
        - license
        - if free license, links to available versions (online source, corpus version)
        - orig. language
        - translated language(s)
        - translator(s)

# Promoting Divvun

We need more promotions of the Divvun tools. Making a movie demonstrating its
use (screencast), and put it up on Youtube.

Next tour de Divvun probably in week 13. **Per-Eric** has talked to Sámij
åhpadusguovdásj in Jokkmokk, they would also like to get a presentation.

Presentation in Trondheim:
* Divvun - what has happened since last year?
* Oahpa
* Dictionaries:
    - smenob
    - smanob/swe ?

Bring 50 CD's and leaflets to Trondheim.

**TODO:**
* make leaflet to inform about the project (**Jovsset, David**)
    - better Windows usage descriptions, with emphasis on the pitfalls
   (**Jovsset**)
    - add link to OOo installation and usage instructions (**Sjur**)
        - done
    - improve OOo instructions (**Børre**)
        - done
    - add Linux info (**Børre**)
        - will do this this week
    - add InDesign text (**Sjur**) - requires installer
        - we now have an installer, but the text needs to be updated
    - review the Windows pictures, and usage instructions for MS Office 2003
   (**Jovsset**)
        - done
    - text (**Jovsset**)
        - done
    - leaflet meeting on Wednesday at 9.30 Norw. time (**Jovsset, Børre, Sjur**)
        - done
    - make XSL script to transform Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
   (**Børre, Sjur**)
* distribute CD version through the library bus, the language centres and common
  sami centres in all of Sápmi. Gaaltije in Östersund for example.
  (**Leif Åge, Jovsset**)
* contact MS Nordic, and ask them to include the Divvun tools in the next Office
  releases (both Windows and Mac). The integration can/should be done by
  Polderland, which is an official MS subcontractor/integrator. It could be used
  by MS as part of their advertising for the next releases, and it will make it
  much easier for people to get access to the tools. (**Sjur**)
* prepare to go to Røyrvik and promote Dåvvome (**David**)
    - old date cancelled, no new date, but probably in April
* make a screencast of using our tools (**Børre**)
    - first screencasts made, links to appear
* "order" 50 CD's from **Leif Åge** (**David**)
* print 50 leaflets and send them to Trondheim (**Børre**)

# Future plans, directions and ideas

See a separate document in `plan/strat/5year.jspwiki`.

## Northern areas project

Collective congratulations!

The money will be in the next state budget, meaning potentially a project start January 1, 2010. We need to prepare for such a project start, even though we don't know that we will get the money.

**TODO:**
* Attend a beginners' course in Russian (priority: the alphabet!) near you..
* Keep potential key personel alert
* To a certain extent plan for The Thing

# Infrastructure

To accomodate future enhancements in different directions (in rough order of
importance):

1. test bench for all parts of our language technology efforts
    1. test bench enhanced, but not yet complet
1. set up the Leopard Server features for collaborative support:
    1. permanent chat rooms
    1. stored (and indexed) chat transcripts of the chat rooms
    1. iCal server / group calendars
    1. wiki
1. wiki? on G5 (is part of Leopard Server) or other web-based documentation
1. improve Forrest stability and i18n support ( the divvun crashes)
    1. **Sjur** has been working on better i18n and pdf rendering
    1. **Børre** has some ideas for getting back to serving static html files
1. reorganise the documentation:
    1. differ between target groups
    1. get better grouping
    1. decide what to write in forrest and what in wiki
   (cf. [Apertium](http://www.apertium.org/) and
   [http://xixona.dlsi.ua.es/apertium/]) for a similar split)
    1. update/add missing parts
1. migrate lexc lexicons to XML, splitting the task
    1. Name lexica (the Name project)
    1. Dictionaries (already in XML, task is to integrate them)
    1. At least migrate the lexc open POSes (Komi as a pilot case)
1. change the look of the documentation web
1. use HFST as alternative to XFST
1. investigate the [NSIS installer](http://nsis.sourceforge.net/Main_Page),
  potentially replacing the InstallShield package from Polderland
    1. done, Polderland is switching to NSIS too, will do most of the work for us
1. corpus content moved to Max Planck repositories? Norsk språkbank?
1. update infrastructure to allow content-restricted spellers for special target
  groups

SVN issues:
* http access not yet available (https only at the moment, but it works as
  anonymous checkout if the user is *not* specified)
* read access to the whole repo is working, BUT:
    - `gt/*/polderland` should be protected
    - `plan` should be protected
* certain users need to be on the UiT VPN to be able to commit (bug #705)
* UTF-8 problem in svn commit mails: the commit log text is garbled

SVN strategies:
* split the repository into two, or move the closed parts to the root of our present svn repository?
* the continuation depends on the above

**TODO:**
* infrastructure remake: (**Børre, Ciprian, Saara, Sjur, Tomi, Trond**)
    - more modularised make / build infra (prepare for smn, sms, sjd, others)
    - merge gt, kt and st into one
    - modularised preprocess and spellrelax
    - meeting Wednesday 13.00 (**Børre, Ciprian, Sjur, Tomi, Trond**)
        - done
    - alternatives to make:
        - [SCons](http://www.scons.org/)
        - [makepp](http://makepp.sourceforge.net/)
        - [Maven](http://maven.apache.org/) (for java-projects)
        - [CMake](http://www.cmake.org/)
* make a test-all target that runs all tests we have (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
    - delayed until we have restructured the make/build process
* define and document testing routines (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
    - delayed until we have restructured the make/build process
* follow-up migration to svn:
    - close the open SVN repository at requested paths (**Ciprian**)
        - completely closed at the moment, until we have solved the path-based control
    - prepare and discuss with external users: Jack Ruether (**Trond**)
* test iCal Server (on G5) (**Børre**)
* remove TOC from the giellatekno home page by using dispatcher (**Trond**)
* meeting to discuss SVN reorg to resolve the access control thing - Wedn. 9.30
  (**Børre, Ciprian, Sjur, Tomi, Trond**)

# Name lexicon/risten.no infrastructure

Instead of building our own webforms and back-end update scripts, use XForms
with a premade connection to our xml db. Orbeon XForms is such a tool (open
source).

From the meeting with the terminology and IT teams last week:
* no major rework on the present search interface now
* no work on the editing section; instead:
* add existing lists of sanctioned terminology as separate term entities
* add a dictionary if we can make one with sufficient quality

This means the following tasks:
* find already approved lists, in paper or electronic form (**term team**)
* convert paper lists to electronic lists (**term team**)
* convert lists to standard XML (**Sjur, Tomi**)
* add prepared lists to risten.no (**Sjur, Tomi**)

**TODO:**
1. fix i18n bug in risten.no/G5 (so they will work without the proper locale
  request) (**Sjur**)
1. fix bugs in lexc2xml; add comments to the log element (**Saara**)
1. finish first version of the editing (**Sjur**)
1. test editing of the xml files. If ok, then: (**Sjur, Thomas, Trond**)
1. make terms-smX.xml <=== automatically from propernoun-sme-lex.xml (add `nob`
  as well) (the morphological section should be kept intact, in e.g.
  propernoun-sme-morph.txt) (**Sjur, Saara**)
1. convert propernoun-($lang)-lex.txt to a derived file from common xml files
  (**Sjur, Tomi, Saara**)
1. implement data synchronisation between [risten.no](http://www.risten.no) and
  the cvs repo, and possibly other servers (ie the G5 as an alternative server
  to the public risten.no - it might be faster and better suited than the
  official one; also local installations could be treated the same way)
1. start to use the xml file as source file
1. clean terms-sme.xml such that all names have the correct tag for their use
  (e.g. @type=secondary) (**Thomas, linguists**)
1. merge placenames which are errouneously in different entries: e.g. Helsinki,
  Helsingfors, Helsset (**linguists**)
1. publish the name lexicon on risten.no (**Sjur**)
1. add missing parallel names for placenames (**linguists**)
1. add informative links between first names like Niillas and Nils
  (**linguists**)

## Dictionaries

Ciprian is working towards our first `sma-nob/swe` dictionary, coming today?

**TODO:**
* Technical meeting - Wed. 12.30: (**Sjur, Trond, Ciprian**)
    - Windows: Stardict and its possible replacement
    - Compilation and pipeline
* smadic meeting: How to copy smenob work - Tue 9.30
  (**Ciprian, Trond, Lene, Maja, David**)
* Set up the apache server for the risten.no beta on the linux box + Xserve.
  (**Børre**)
* set up risten.no on eXist/XServe (as a beta version site) (**Sjur**)
    - not yet done
* set up required infra for smenob on risten.no/XServe (**Sjur**)
    - waiting for the above
* Continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
* end user documentation (how to download and install) (**Ciprian, Trond**)
    - started, not complete
* Contact *Davvi Girji* about cooperation on electronic dictionaries
  (**Sjur**)

# Proofing tools

## HFST-based proofing tools

Meeting with Kimmo Koskenniemi and Krister Lindén. Discussed overall
architecture, functionality.

**TODO:**
* start to write an API specification, and an implementation specification
  (**Sjur**)

## Hunspell

The version we have at the moment (beta6) will be our last one for a while.

## OpenXSpell

As a middle-man between Enchant and MacOS X speller API, this is still
interesting. As a direct Hunspell front-end it is not, cf above.

## Testing

### Spelling Error Markup

**TODO:**
* Set up ways of adding meta-information (source info, used in testing or not,
  added to lexicon or not) (**Saara**)
* test new and nested error markup (**Sjur**)
    - nesting still needs to be tested, depends on new `ccat` feature

### Speller testing

**TODO:**
* test the error type selection feature in ccat (**Sjur**)

### Testing open-source Norwegian spellers

**Sjur** has invited the open-source group to test their spell-checker using our
test bench. The response has been positive, we'll see what happens.

We should go to their developer meetings, and present our work and how to work
with language technology.

## Speller bugs

List of bugs returned from Polderland:
* 621
* 630
* 652
* 656
* 676

Open issues based on test results:

### sme
Version: **Davvisámi, version 1.1, 2008-12-17**
* 399 - **REGERSSION:** missing numerals (plural forms)
* 425 - X not recognized; single letters were left out - **OPEN**
* 435 - roman numbers - inflection of single letter numbers
        rejected, as well as some complex numbers (but is ok in `smj`) - still
        **OPEN**
    - we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
   separate lexicon file
* 581 - consonant doubling - seems **FIXED**
* 595 - prefix+name without hyphen (*ovdaLot* instead of *ovda-Lot*) - still
        **OPEN**
* 603 - suomabealdi accepted - still **OPEN**
* 606 - compound-tags LEXICON VUOHTA - **OPEN**
* 613 - short gen. as second compound part - still **OPEN**
* 619 - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails - *vihttasoarttat*
        remaining - still **OPEN**
* 629 - *a* taking part in compounding without hyphen - still **OPEN**
    - only open case has word *A-finálaid* compounded
* 642 - noun/adj/proper + hyphen + ain - still **OPEN**
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still **OPEN**, open case has uppercase letters
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still **OPEN**
* 728 - vowel shortening GenCmp+Left-tagged - still **OPEN**
* 779 - caseforms of pronoun okatahat

### smj
Version: **Julevsáme, version 1.1, 2008-12-17**
* 435 - roman number - single letter numbers now recognised
    -      we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
        separate lexicon file
    -      please note that *inflection* of single letter numerals is **fine** in
        `smj`, as opposed to `sme`
* 594 - **REGRESSION:** *lågenanguoktáj* not recognized
* 595 - prefix+name as split comp without hyphen - still **OPEN**
* 596 - C-giellan is not accepted - **OPEN**
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still **OPEN**, open case has uppercase letters
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still **OPEN**
* 650 - noun prefix+name compound without hyphen - still **OPEN**
* 652 - UPPERCASE-typos only get acronym-suggestions - still **OPEN**
* 692 - numeral-variants - all but one fixed (*gáktsalågenantjuotakta*), but
        still **OPEN**

**TODO:**
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion (**Tomi**)

## Hyphenator bugs

Open issues based on test results :

### sme
Lexicon version: **Davvisámi, version 1.1, 2008-12-17**
* 468 - *Márkomeanu* - still **OPEN**
* 547 - hyphen in front of vowel: *Lotnolasealáhusas* - still **OPEN**
* 548 - mid syllable hyphenation: *Háliidivččen* - still **OPEN**
* 549 - division without hyph: *Váccedettiin* - still **OPEN**

### smj
Lexicon version: **Julevsáme, version 1.1, 2008-12-17**
* 547 - hyphen in front of vowel: *Jienastimnjuolgadusá* and *Orgánajs* -
        still **OPEN**
* 670 - Hard hyphen replaced with soft hyphen: *10-biejvvásattja* (the word is
        not rec.; Bug #711) - still **OPEN**

**TODO:**
* fix PL hyphenator errors (**Tomi**)

## Installer changes

**TODO:**
* make a Mac installer for the InDesign Divvun tools (**Tomi**)
* replace InstallShield with an open-source alternative (**Tomi**)
* test InDesign installer (**Sjur**)
* meeting Thursday 9:30 to go through the present installers (**Sjur, Tomi**)
    - done

## User documentation

**TODO:**
* InDesign documentation (**Sjur**)
    - Norwegian translation received from Davvi Girji

## 1.2 release

Content:
* several smj bug fixes
* lexicalisations
* InDesign Mac & Win
* new OOo beta
* improved installers, at least for Mac, preferably also for Windows

# Other

## South Sámi seminar follow-up

We should make a final list of who went to the hotel when, to check the final
bill from the hotel. Sjur will discuss this with **David**.

## Travelling plans in the coming months

* Stockholm 19.3. - **Sjur**
* Trondheim - `sma` school conference - 25-26.4. - **David**
* Project board meeting in Karasjok, ca 15.4. - **Sjur**
* Nesna conference on `sma` education and research, especially language
    - link? date? (sometime in May)
    - **Maja** could go there
* NODALIDA, Odense, 14-16.5. - **Sjur, Trond, Lene, ...**

## Text to speech

The TTS meeting with Antti was held (without Maja and Thomas). Topics:
* what kind of feedback is needed from us? Quite a lot of linguistics

## TNC, rikstermbanken and Sámi terms

RTB will be released:
* Datum: torsdagen den 19 mars 2009
* Tid:  14.00–15.00 (följt av mingel fram till 16.00)
* Plats:  Rosenbads konferenscenter, Drottninggatan 1, Stockholm

Available at: [http://www.rikstermbanken.se]

## Corpus contracts + open source

Postponed until the svn repository is fully functional (it is too open now).

## FSMNLP Pretoria 21-24 July

* [Call for paper](http://fsmnlp2009.fastar.org/Call.html)
* One of the themes: less-resourced lgs and fst. Should some of us send a paper?

* IMPORTANT DATES
    - Full paper submissions due: 22 March 2009
    - Notification of acceptance for full papers: 12 May 2009
    - Extended abstract submissions due: 17 May 2009
    - Notification of acceptance for extended abstracts: June 14 2009
    - Deadline for inclusion in preproceedings: June 28 2009

We'll return to this tomorrow afternoon, and decide upon if, who, what.

# Next meeting, closing

The next meeting is 23.3.2009, 9.30 Norwegian time.

The meeting was closed at 12:37.

# Appendix - task lists for the next five days

## Boerre

* make XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
* print 50 leaflets and send them to Trondheim
* meeting to discuss SVN reorg to resolve the access control thing - Wedn. 9.30
* Implement new version of giellatekno front page without ToC
* leaflet: add Linux info
* `gt/Makefile` remake
* Set up the apache server for the risten.no beta on the linux box + Xserve.
* add sound to screencast of using our tools
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Ciprian

* improve processing of new corpus documents
* make the pipeline of *StarDict* dictionary generation running on the Mac
* take care of the error logging during conversion process
* look at the xml conversion quality
* make a list of (general and special) problems related with
  converting docs into xml-forat and adding them to the corpora
* continue the search and testing of an appropriate tool for
  lexicon working (no xml-file editing via text editors!)
* enhance the sami-week-version of sme:nob based on the discussion with
  **Trond, Lene**
* start building the Kildin dictionary
* check the possible bug in the sma:nob-swe dictionary
* meeting to discuss SVN reorg to resolve the access control thing - Wedn. 9.30
* Technical dictionary meeting - Wed. 12.30
* smadic meeting: How to copy smenob work - Tue 9.30
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## David

* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts
* contact the sami radio about older manuscrips
* call **Anne-Grethe Bientie** and **Bierna Bientie** about bible texts
* call Š-blađđi about south saami texts
* prepare to go to Røyrvik and promote Dåvvome
* make a document for the SGL/SGM, `sma` section
* `sma` abbreviations in the SGM document
 `sma` adjectives
* go to Trondheim
* ask Leif-Åge to send 50 copies of the Divvun-cd to Rica Hotell Nidelven
* make a list of who stayed at the hotell in Trondheim
* smadic meeting: How to copy smenob work - Tue 9.30

## Jovsset

* get the list of verbs from the auhtors of*Verbh*.
* Find a suitable infrastructure for the distribution of the CD version.
  Possible  through the library bus, the language centres and common
  sami centres in all of Sápmi.
* write formal letter to translator of *Gåessie dah jeatjebh åerieminie*
* leaflet: review the Windows pictures, and usage instructions for MS Office.
  Review especially the select sami language part.
* Write installation instructions for word 2003
* better Windows usage descriptions, with emphasis on the pitfalls
* Work with the Leaflet, deadline next monday 16.03.2009
* `sma` placenames in SGM document
* leaflet meeting on Wednesday at 9.30 Norw. time (with **Børre, Sjur**)

## Per-Eric
* follow-up contract from **Lena Davidsson**
* Call **Gøran Matias Andersen** about his `smj` texts
* work with missing lists
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Maja

* smadic meeting: How to copy smenob work - Tue 9.30
* contact NRK Nord-Trøndelag about recordings in `sma` and broadcast
  manuscripts
* more work on `sma` adjectives
* Send Åsta Vangberg a contract
* Send Lena Kappfjell and Harald Gaski a contract
* Send Sig-Britt Pärsson a contract -
* Need to start programming- fresh up/learn to program adjektives and verbs

## Saara
* Include Vasta and Sahka in the log
* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* Set up ways of adding meta-information for proofing correct corpus docs
  (source info, used in testing or not, added to lexicon or not)

## Sjur

* make XSL script to transform leaflet Forrest XDocs to an OOo Drawer document
* meeting to discuss SVN reorg to resolve the access control thing - Wedn. 9.30
* Technical dictionary meeting - Wed. 12.30
* start to write a proofing API & implementation specification
* name db/risten.no
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
* InDesign documentation
* continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (with **Ciprian, Trond**)
* Contact *Davvi Girji* about cooperation on electronic dictionaries
* subcontractor work for `sma` proofing tools
* support and maintenance contract for `sme` and `smj`, MS+Adobe tools
* Sámi languages as part of *Norsk språkbank*
* leaflet: add InDesign text
* set up risten.no on eXist/XServe (as a beta version site)
* set up required infra for smenob on risten.no/XServe
* `sma` umlaut / derivation work
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Thomas
* `sma` umlaut / derivation work
* `sma` adjectives
* finish reformulating the proper noun grammar like the verbs
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Tomi
* meeting to discuss SVN reorg to resolve the access control thing - Wedn. 9.30
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
* fix double hyphen bugs
* fix PL hyphenator bugs
* fix PL and Hunspell conversion bugs
* infrastructure remake
* `sma` umlaut / derivation work
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond

* meeting to discuss SVN reorg to resolve the access control thing - Wedn. 9.30
* Technical dictionary meeting - Wed. 12.30
* smadic meeting: How to copy smenob work - Tue 9.30
* Register oahpa.no
* end user documentation (how to download and install) - dictionaries
* Check for IP numbers in the log
* Improve the fst handling
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
