# Meeting setup

* Date: 5.1.2009
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Internet
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat

# Agenda

Cf. one of the following, depending on context:
* the upper bar of the SEE window (provided you use the JSPWiki syntax mode)
* the TOC in Forrest-rendered output, like HTML and PDF

# Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 10:59.

Present: **Børre, David, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi (text only), Trond**

Absent: **Ciprian, Jovsset**

Agenda accepted.

# Updated task status since last meeting

## Børre
* leaflet: add Linux info
* Make a divvun-tools download log
* `gt/Makefile` remake
* fine tune suggestions
* improve OOo instructions
* increase version number
    - done
* changes since 1.0.1
* update our front page when released
    - done
* build new hunspell lexicons
    - done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Ciprian
* close the open SVN repository at requested paths
* continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (with **Sjur, Trond**)
* improve processing of new corpus documents
* make the pipeline of *StarDict* dictionary generation running on the Mac
* update the Makefile for generating dictionaries (related to the dictionary
  infrastructure task)
* take care of the error logging during conversion process
* look at the xml conversion quality
* make a list of (general and special) problems related with
  converting docs into xml-forat and adding them to the corpora
* continue the search and testing of an appropriate tool for
  lexicon working (no xml-file editing via text editors!)
* generate new sme:nob/nob:sme dictionaries in all formats, marking them as
  "Beta"-versions (Sjur's proposal to use an image background for that purpose)
* infrastructure remake - news discussion
* short meeting to go through missing points before a dictionary release
  (with **Sjur, Trond**)
* dictionary discussion on estethics, layout (with **Trond**)
* build the first version of smanob-dictionary (both MacDict and StarDict) by
  15. dec. 2008
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## David
* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts
    - added some more texts from the web before christmas and started OCR:ing today
* prepare a workshop on South Sámi orthography and grammar (**David**)
    - set up a preliminary agenda (**with Sjur**)
        - done
    - check in first sketch
        - done
    - prepare data for each topic (**with Sjur and Trond**)
        - nothing done
* call **Ristin Persson** for permission to use Sámi Radio texts
    - still cannot reach her
* integrate adjectives into the analyser
    - done
* work with missing lists
    - done for now
* meet with **Maja** to discuss corpus gathering
    - done
* stay in touch with UmU about c-thesises in south sami
    - not done
* finnish looking at **Ciprians** list of words.
    - done
* Call Fylkesmannen i Nordland
    - called but havn't got a hold on the right person yet
* prepare open invitation to Trondheim seminar (with**Sjur**)
    - unfortunately forgot to send invitation

## Jovsset
* get the list of verbs from the auhtors of*Verbh*.
* Find a suitable infrastructure for the distribution of the CD version.
  Possible  through the library bus, the language centres and common
  sami centres in all of Sápmi.
* write formal letter to translator of *Gåessie dah jeatjebh åerieminie*
* leaflet: review the Windows pictures, and usage instructions for MS Office.
  Review especially the select sami language part.
* Write installation instructions for word 2003
* better Windows usage descriptions, with emphasis on the pitfalls
* work with missing lists

## Per-Eric
* transfer the `smj` texts by **Kurt Tore** and **Ulf Stefan Winka** to our
  corpus repository
* follow-up contract from **Lena Davidsson**
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Saara
* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* Set up ways of adding meta-information for proofing correct corpus docs
  (source info, used in testing or not, added to lexicon or not)
* implement the ped UI and functionality

## Sjur
* name db/risten.no
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
* InDesign documentation
* continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (with **Ciprian, Trond**)
* Contact *Davvi Girji* about cooperation on electronic dictionaries
* subcontractor work for `sma` proofing tools, MS and Adobe versions
* support and maintenance contract for `sme` and `smj`, MS+Adobe tools
* Sámi languages as part of *Norsk språkbank*
* contact MS Nordic, and ask them to include the Divvun tools in the next Office
  releases
* set up a preliminary agenda for `sma` workshop (**with David**)
* prepare data for each topic at `sma` workshop (**with David and Trond**)
* short meeting to go through missing points before a dictionary release
  (with **Ciprian, Trond**)
* leaflet: add link to OOo installation and usage instructions
* leaflet: add InDesign text
* make an installer for the InDesign Divvun tools
* 1.1 readme - English
    - made template, done by Børre
* installation package for MS Off Mac
    - done
* update installation package for MS Off Win
    - done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
* other things:
    - administrative work
    - preparations for permanent organisation discussions

## Thomas
* gather the `smj` texts from *Nord-Salten avis* (online archive)
    - not done
* fine tune suggestions for Hunspell
    - is this any more for now?
* look at test cases still not behaving properly
    - not anything this week
* `sme->smj` lexicon conversion to build bilingual lexicon resources, and
  increase `smj` coverage
    - not done
* review the readme files for MS tools
**done
* write a short e-mail about the release, and send it to our release e-mail list
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - not anything this week

## Tomi
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
    - not done
* fix double hyphen bugs
    - waiting for PL
* fix PL hyphenator bugs
    - not done
* fix PL and Hunspell conversion bugs
    - working
* infrastructure remake
    - not done
* document the error type selection feature in ccat
    - not done
* increase speller lex version number
    - done
* 1.1 version of MS lexicon
    - done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond
* integrate `sma` adjectives into the analyser (without morphology)
    - Work in progress.
* finish reformulating the proper noun grammar (with **Sjur**)
    - Not finished.
* infrastructure remake
    - Børre and Ciprian.
* prepare data for each topic at `sma` workshop (**with David and Sjur**)
    - Not embarked upon.
* dictionary discussion on estethics, layout (with **Ciprian**)
    - Have a sketch ready, but no meetings yet
* meeting to go through missing points before a dictionary release
  (with **Ciprian, Sjur**)
    - No meeting yet
* clean the `smanob` data
    - Now we go for a new start, after Ciprians new version. Here, I have done some.
* discuss new-found `smj` issues (with **Lene, Linda, Thomas**)
    - Improved smj to a certain extent. No meeting so far.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
    - Worked on bugs.

# Pedagogical software online

Meeting memos can be found at
[http://giellatekno.uit.no/ped/index.html#Meeting+memos]

Oahpa needs a separate domain - what shall it be?

Candidates:
* http://oahpa.no/
* http://oahpa.uit.no/

We would prefer the former, but it seems there is a rule that a given IP domain
cannot register but 20 direct top nodes. Suggestion: apply for oahpa.no, but
start to use oahpa.uit.no. In the application, argue that the limit of 20 top
domain names is arbitrary, and causing a lot of trouble for large and diverse
organisations like uit.

# Corpus gathering

**David** has found some texts on the net, and is also OCR scanning some books
we have permission to use.

**TODO:**
* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts (**David, Jovsset**)
* transfer the `smj` texts by **Kurt Tore** and **Ulf Stefan Winka** to our
  corpus repository (**Per-Eric**)
* other contacts: Lena Davidsson, daughter to Lars-Matto Tuolja
* make a 1-page, light version of the contract, also in Swedish
  (**Børre, David, Sjur, Trond**)
    - Bokmål and Northern Sami versions are commited at `xtdoc/sd/src/documentation/content/xdocs/adm/legal/short-contract.(nb|se).xml`
* discuss infra improvements for corpus rep administration (**Børre, Ciprian**)
    - delayed till we are done with the `gt/Makefile` improvements
* gather the `smj` texts from *Nord-Salten avis* (online archive)
  (**Thomas**)

# Promoting Divvun

**TODO:**
* Make a download log (**Børre**)
* make leaflet to inform about the project (**Jovsset, David**)
    - better Windows usage descriptions, with emphasis on the pitfalls
   (**Jovsset**)
    - add link to OOo installation and usage instructions (**Sjur**)
    - improve OOo instructions (**Børre**)
    - add Linux info (**Børre**)
    - add InDesign text (**Sjur**) - requires installer
    - review the Windows pictures, and usage instructions for MS Office 2003
   (**Jovsset**)
        - text (**Jovsset**)
* distribute CD version through the library bus, the language centres and common
  sami centres in all of Sápmi. Gaaltije in Östersund for example.
  (**Leif Åge, Jovsset**)
* contact MS Nordic, and ask them to include the Divvun tools in the next Office
  releases (both Windows and Mac). The integration can/should be done by
  Polderland, which is an official MS subcontractor/integrator. It could be used
  by MS as part of their advertising for the next releases, and it will make it
  much easier for people to get access to the tools. (**Sjur**)
* write a short memo from the meeting with **John Marcus** (**Jovsset**)

# Future plans, directions and ideas

See a separate document in `plan/strat/5year.jspwiki`.

# Infrastructure

To accomodate future enhancements in different directions (in rough order of
importance):

1. test bench for all parts of our language technology efforts
    1. test bench enhanced, but not yet complet
1. set up the Leopard Server features for collaborative support:
    1. permanent chat rooms
    1. stored (and indexed) chat transcripts of the chat rooms
    1. iCal server / group calendars
    1. wiki
1. wiki? on G5 (is part of Leopard Server) or other web-based documentation
1. improve Forrest stability and i18n support ( the divvun crashes)
    1. **Sjur** has been working on better i18n and pdf rendering
    1. **Børre** has some ideas for getting back to serving static html files
1. reorganise the documentation:
    1. differ between target groups
    1. get better grouping
    1. decide what to write in forrest and what in wiki
   (cf. [Apertium](http://www.apertium.org/) and
   [http://xixona.dlsi.ua.es/apertium/]) for a similar split)
    1. update/add missing parts
1. migrate lexc lexicons to XML, splitting the task
    1. Name lexica (the Name project)
    1. Dictionaries (already in XML, task is to integrate them)
    1. At least migrate the lexc open POSes (Komi as a pilot case)
1. change the look of the documentation web
1. sfst?
    1. replacement for xfst -> see [omorf
| http://www.ling.helsinki.fi/kieliteknologia/tutkimus/omor/index.shtml],
   [omorf wiki](https://kitwiki.csc.fi/twiki/bin/view/KitWiki/HfstHome) and
   [omorfi](https://gna.org/projects/omorfi)
    1. replacement for hunspell/open-source proofing tools
1. investigate the [NSIS installer](http://nsis.sourceforge.net/Main_Page),
  potentially replacing the InstallShield
  package from Polderland
1. corpus content moved to Max Planck repositories? Norsk språkbank?
1. update infrastructure to allow content-restricted spellers for special target
  groups

SVN issues:
* http access not yet available (https only at the moment, but it works as
  anonymous checkout if the user is *not* specified)
* read access to the whole repo is working, BUT:
    - `gt/*/polderland` should be protected
    - `plan` should be protected
* certain users need to be on the UiT VPN to be able to commit (bug #705)
* UTF-8 problem in svn commit mails: the commit log text is garbled

**TODO:**
* infrastructure remake: (**Børre, Ciprian, Saara, Sjur, Tomi, Trond**)
    - more modularised make / build infra (prepare for smn, sms, sjd, others)
    - merge gt, kt and st into one
    - modularised preprocess and spellrelax
* make a test-all target that runs all tests we have (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
    - delayed until we have restructured the make/build process
* define and document testing routines (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
    - delayed until we have restructured the make/build process
* follow-up migration to svn:
    - close the open SVN repository at requested paths (**Ciprian**)
        - completely closed at the moment, until we have solved the path-based control
    - prepare and discuss with external users: Jack Ruether (**Trond**)
* test iCal Server (on G5) (**Børre**)
* remove TOC from the giellatekno home page by using dispatcher (**Trond**)

# Linguistics

## North Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

## Lule Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

## South Sámi

**TODO:**
* step two for adjectives (**David, Trond, Sjur**)
* finish reformulating the proper noun grammar like the verbs (**Sjur, Trond**)
* Missing list (focus on closed class words and addition on missing nouns,
  adjectives and verbs) (**David, Jovsset**)
* prepare a workshop on South Sámi orthography and grammar (**David**)
    - date: last week of February (23.-27.) seems to work fine with SGL/South Sámi
   branch
    - Place: tentatively *Trondheim*, nothing decided, no meeting rooms ordered
    - we'll cover travel and hotel expenses
    - we'll invite both SGL and as many of the other key persons in the `sma`
   writing/normativity community as possible
    - set up a preliminary agenda (**David, Sjur**)
        - check in first sketch
        - send copy of letter to **Sjur**
    the seminar will be held
    - prepare data for each topic (**David, Sjur, Trond**)
    - prepare open invitation to Trondheim seminar (**David, Sjur**)
* clean the `smanob` data (**Trond** with some help)

# Name lexicon/risten.no infrastructure

From the meeting with the terminology and IT teams last week:
* no major rework on the present search interface now
* no work on the editing section; instead:
* add existing lists of sanctioned terminology as separate term entities
* add a dictionary if we can make one with sufficient quality

This means the following tasks:
* find already approved lists, in paper or electronic form (**term team**)
* convert paper lists to electronic lists (**term team**)
* convert lists to standard XML (**Sjur, Tomi**)
* add prepared lists to risten.no (**Sjur, Tomi**)

**TODO:**
1. fix i18n bug in risten.no/G5 (so they will work without the proper locale
  request) (**Sjur**)
1. fix bugs in lexc2xml; add comments to the log element (**Saara**)
1. finish first version of the editing (**Sjur**)
1. test editing of the xml files. If ok, then: (**Sjur, Thomas, Trond**)
1. make terms-smX.xml <=== automatically from propernoun-sme-lex.xml (add `nob`
  as well) (the morphological section should be kept intact, in e.g.
  propernoun-sme-morph.txt) (**Sjur, Saara**)
1. convert propernoun-($lang)-lex.txt to a derived file from common xml files
  (**Sjur, Tomi, Saara**)
1. implement data synchronisation between [risten.no](http://www.risten.no) and
   the cvs repo, and possibly other servers (ie the G5 as an alternative server
   to the public risten.no - it might be faster and better suited than the
   official one; also local installations could be treated the same way)
1. start to use the xml file as source file
1. clean terms-sme.xml such that all names have the correct tag for their use
  (e.g. @type=secondary) (**Thomas, linguists**)
1. merge placenames which are errouneously in different entries: e.g. Helsinki,
  Helsingfors, Helsset (**linguists**)
1. publish the name lexicon on risten.no (**Sjur**)
1. add missing parallel names for placenames (**linguists**)
1. add informative links between first names like Niillas and Nils
  (**linguists**)

## Dictionaries

Status
* sma-nob first alpha released internally before Christmas. Needs morphology.
* We need to finish one dictionary till the oahpa release:
    - a subset of smenob / nobsme with the Álgosátnegirji and oahpa lemmas.

**TODO:**
* Continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)
* make simple installer applications
* make a public release
    - Make a homepage with instructions for dictionary use:
   `xtdoc/gtuit/src/documentation/content/xdocs/dict.eng.xml`
    - Clarify the difference between local and online dictionaries:
        - Plugin for Firefox and Internet Explorer (online dictionaries)
* Contact Davvi Girji about cooperation on electronic dictionaries (**Sjur**)
* short meeting to go through missing points before a release
  (**Ciprian, Sjur, Trond**)

# Proofing tools

## Hunspell

Beta6 released as part of the 1.1 release of the Divvun tools. Report all bug
in Bugzilla.

**TODO:**
* work on and debug compounds (**Børre, Thomas**)

## OpenXSpell

Working everywhere (almost) in MacOS X applications, provides Sámi spell
checking system-wide through a hunspell back-end.
[OpenXSPell](http://www.cygnusblack.co.uk/openxspell/index.html)

There are two issues:
* strings with non-ASCII chars are always flagged
* asking for suggestions on words witn non-ASCII chars crashes OpenXSpell

## Testing

### Spelling Error Markup

**TODO:**
* Set up ways of adding meta-information (source info, used in testing or not,
  added to lexicon or not) (**Saara**)
* test new and nested error markup (**Sjur**)
    - nesting still needs to be tested, depends on new `ccat` feature

### Speller testing

**TODO:**
* test the error type selection feature in ccat (**Sjur**)
* document the feature (**Tomi**)

## Speller bugs

List of bugs returned from Polderland: 621, 630, 652, 656, 676.

Status as of the 1.1 release: **12** open `sme` bugs, **8** open `smj` bugs.

Open issues based on test results:

### sme
Version: **Davvisámi, version 1.1, 2008-12-17**
* 397 - see 449 - **FIXED**
* 425 - X not recognized; single letters were left out - **OPEN**
* 435 - roman numbers - inflection of single letter numbers
        rejected, as well as some complex numbers (but is ok in `smj`) - still
        **OPEN**
    - we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
   separate lexicon file
* 581 - consonant doubling - still **OPEN**, but input words are real words also
    - **FIXED** ?
* 593 - Missing words in beta 2 - **FIXED**
* 595 - prefix+name without hyphen (*ovdaLot* instead of *ovda-Lot*) - still
        **OPEN**
* 597 - does not recognize nubbelohki - **FIXED**
* 599 - numeral attr:s on lot - *oktalot* not recognized - **FIXED**
    - 'oktalot' - 10? or 11?
* 603 - suomabealdi accepted - still **OPEN**
* 606 - **REGRESSION:** compound-tags LEXICON VUOHTA
* 613 - short gen. as second compound part - still **OPEN**
* 619 - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails - *vihttasoarttat*
        remaining - still **OPEN**
* 629 - *a* taking part in compounding without hyphen - still **OPEN**
    - only open case has word *A-finálaid* compounded
* 642 - noun/adj/proper + hyphen + ain - still **OPEN**
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still **OPEN**, open case has uppercase letters
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still **OPEN**
* 655 - pron + nai - **FIXED**
    - sme.fst does not recognise it either; it should be fixed in lexc
* 696 - numerals + NAMAT-adjs + vuohta - **FIXED**
* 728 - vowel shortening GenCmp+Left-tagged - still **OPEN**

### smj
Version: **Julevsáme, version 1.1, 2008-12-17**
* 435 - roman number - single letter numbers now recognised
    -      we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
        separate lexicon file
    -      please note that *inflection* of single letter numerals is **fine** in
        `smj`, as opposed to `sme`
* 589 - suggestions involving vowel-replacement - **FIXED**
    - isn't *tjåhkkåjit* a word, **Thomas**? - Tomi: word was removed from testfile? Th: yes, it seems to be a word
* 594 - lågenanguoktáj not recognized - **FIXED**
* 595 - prefix+name as split comp without hyphen - still **OPEN**
* 596 - **REGRESSION:** C-giellan is not accepted
* 616 - Bispadime-me-ráden - **FIXED**
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still **OPEN**, open case has uppercase letters
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still **OPEN**
* 650 - noun prefix+name compound without hyphen - still **OPEN**
* 652 - UPPERCASE-typos only get acronym-suggestions - still **OPEN**
* 692 - numeral-variants - all but one fixed (*gáktsalågenantjuotakta*), but
        still **OPEN**
* 711 - **REGRESSION:** numeral compounds and cases (*10-biejvvásattja*)
    - test case seems to be incorrect; Th: yes, I have corrected now

**TODO:**
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion (**Tomi**)

## Hyphenator bugs

Open issues based on test results :

### sme
Lexicon version: **Davvisámi, version 1.1, 2008-12-17**
* 468 - *Márkomeanu* - still **OPEN**
* 547 - hyphen in front of vowel: *Lotnolasealáhusas* - still **OPEN**
* 548 - mid syllable hyphenation: *Háliidivččen* - still **OPEN**
* 549 - division without hyph: *Váccedettiin* - still **OPEN**

### smj
Lexicon version: **Julevsáme, version 1.1, 2008-12-17**
* 547 - hyphen in front of vowel: *Jienastimnjuolgadusá* and *Orgánajs* -
        still **OPEN**
* 670 - Hard hyphen replaced with soft hyphen: *10-biejvvásattja* (the word is not rec.; Bug #711) - still **OPEN**

**TODO:**
* fix PL hyphenator errors (**Tomi**)

## InDesign tools

**TODO:**
* make an installer for the InDesign Divvun tools (**Sjur**)

## Releases

**TODO:**
* update the *Changes* document (**Sjur**)
    - **Børre** did it
* InDesign documentation (**Sjur**)
    - Norwegian translation received from Davvi Girji
* prepare 1.1 release soon
    - target date: December 17
    - released 31.12.2008

### 1.1 Release

**TODO:**
* increase version number (**Børre, Tomi**)
    - done
* 1.1 version of MS tools
    - lexicon (**Tomi**)
        - done
    - changes since 1.0.1 (**Børre**)
        - done
* 1.0betaX for OOo/hunspell
    - lexicon (**Børre**)
        - done
    - readme - English (**Børre, Sjur**)
        - done
* installation package for MS Off Mac (**Sjur**)
    - done
* update installation package for MS Off Win (**Sjur**)
    - done
* review the readme files for MS tools (**Thomas**)
    - done
* update our front page when released (**Børre**)
    - done
* write a short e-mail about the release, and send it to our release e-mail list
  (**Jovsset, Thomas**)
    - not yet done

# Other

## Sámi week in Tromsø

**Sigbjørn Skåden** has asked the UiT gang to demonstrate etc at the Tromsø city
Library as a part of that week and the happenings at the Library. The week
around February 6th (February 2-8). Sounds like a good idea, we will be there.

* ped tools
* Sámi dictionaries
* Sámi proofing tools
* other things?

## Text to speech

Antti has hinted at the possibility of doing beta versions of other
languages as well. We are thus now recording Greenlandic sentences. A further
possibility would be smj, sma, this would require phon-smX.xfst files for
these languages as well (a couple of days' work for smj, more for sma), plus
recording.

## Corpus contracts + open source

Postponed until the svn repository is fully functional (it is too open now).

# Next meeting, closing

The next meeting is 12.1.2009, 9.30 Norwegian time.

**David** possibly away next Monday.

The meeting was closed at 12:30.

# Appendix - task lists for the next five days

## Boerre

* work on and debug compounds in Hunspell
* leaflet: add Linux info
* Make a divvun-tools download log
* `gt/Makefile` remake
* fine tune suggestions
* improve OOo instructions
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Ciprian

* close the open SVN repository at requested paths
* continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (with **Sjur, Trond**)
* improve processing of new corpus documents
* make the pipeline of *StarDict* dictionary generation running on the Mac
* update the Makefile for generating dictionaries (related to the dictionary
  infrastructure task)
* take care of the error logging during conversion process
* look at the xml conversion quality
* make a list of (general and special) problems related with
  converting docs into xml-forat and adding them to the corpora
* continue the search and testing of an appropriate tool for
  lexicon working (no xml-file editing via text editors!)
* generate new sme:nob/nob:sme dictionaries in all formats, marking them as
  "Beta"-versions (Sjur's proposal to use an image background for that purpose)
* infrastructure remake - news discussion
* short meeting to go through missing points before a dictionary release
  (with **Sjur, Trond**)
* dictionary discussion on estethics, layout (with **Trond**)
* build the first version of smanob-dictionary (both MacDict and StarDict) by
  15. dec. 2008
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## David

* continue gathering `sma` corpus texts
* prepare a workshop on South Sámi orthography and grammar (**David**)
    - prepare data for each topic (**with Sjur and Trond**)
* call **Ristin Persson** for permission to use Sámi Radio texts
* stay in touch with UmU about c-thesises in south sami
* Call Fylkesmannen i Nordland
* send open invitation to Trondheim seminar to **Joseph** (with**Sjur**)
* Contact **Sig-Britt Persson** about corpus texts and Seminar
* Translate light version contract to swedish
* Contact Lena Kappfjell and Lajla Mattsson Magga about seminar

## Jovsset

* write a short e-mail about the release, and send it to our release e-mail list
* get the list of verbs from the auhtors of*Verbh*.
* Find a suitable infrastructure for the distribution of the CD version.
  Possible  through the library bus, the language centres and common
  sami centres in all of Sápmi.
* write formal letter to translator of *Gåessie dah jeatjebh åerieminie*
* leaflet: review the Windows pictures, and usage instructions for MS Office.
  Review especially the select sami language part.
* Write installation instructions for word 2003
* better Windows usage descriptions, with emphasis on the pitfalls
* work with missing lists

## Per-Eric
* transfer the `smj` texts by **Kurt Tore** and **Ulf Stefan Winka** to our
  corpus repository
* follow-up contract from **Lena Davidsson**
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Saara
* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* Set up ways of adding meta-information for proofing correct corpus docs
  (source info, used in testing or not, added to lexicon or not)
* implement the ped UI and functionality

## Sjur

* name db/risten.no
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
* InDesign documentation
* continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (with **Ciprian, Trond**)
* Contact *Davvi Girji* about cooperation on electronic dictionaries
* subcontractor work for `sma` proofing tools, MS and Adobe versions
* support and maintenance contract for `sme` and `smj`, MS+Adobe tools
* Sámi languages as part of *Norsk språkbank*
* contact MS Nordic, and ask them to include the Divvun tools in the next Office
  releases
* set up a preliminary agenda for `sma` workshop (**with David**)
* prepare data for each topic at `sma` workshop (**with David and Trond**)
* short meeting to go through missing points before a dictionary release
  (with **Ciprian, Trond**)
* leaflet: add link to OOo installation and usage instructions
* leaflet: add InDesign text
* make an installer for the InDesign Divvun tools
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Thomas
* gather the `smj` texts from *Nord-Salten avis* (online archive)
* work on and debug compounds in Hunspell
* look at test cases still not behaving properly
* write a short e-mail about the release, and send it to our release e-mail list
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Tomi
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
* fix double hyphen bugs
* fix PL hyphenator bugs
* fix PL and Hunspell conversion bugs
* infrastructure remake
* document the error type selection feature in ccat
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond

* Implement new version of giellatekno front page without ToC (with **Børre**)
* prepare data for each topic at `sma` workshop (with **David and Sjur**)
* dictionary discussion on estethics, layout (with **Ciprian**)
* meeting to go through missing points before a dictionary release
  (with **Ciprian, Sjur**)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
