!!!Meeting setup

* Date: 19.1.2009
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Internet
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat

!!!Agenda

Cf. one of the following, depending on context:
* the upper bar of the SEE window (provided you use the JSPWiki syntax mode)
* the TOC in Forrest-rendered output, like HTML and PDF

!!!Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 09:46.

Present: __Børre, Ciprian, Jovsset, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi, Trond__

Absent: __David__

Agenda accepted.

!!!Updated task status since last meeting

!!Børre
* map oahpa.uit.no to victorio.uit.no/oahpa/
* work on and debug compounds in Hunspell
* leaflet: add Linux info
* Make a divvun-tools download log
* {{gt/Makefile}} remake
* fine tune suggestions
* improve OOo instructions
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Ciprian
* close the open SVN repository at requested paths
* improve processing of new corpus documents
* make the pipeline of ''StarDict'' dictionary generation running on the Mac
* update the Makefile for generating dictionaries (related to the dictionary
  infrastructure task)
* take care of the error logging during conversion process
* look at the xml conversion quality
* make a list of (general and special) problems related with 
  converting docs into xml-forat and adding them to the corpora
* continue the search and testing of an appropriate tool for 
  lexicon working (no xml-file editing via text editors!)
* build the intelligent sma:nob dict in mac-format
* build the sami-week-version of sme:nob in all formats
* infrastructure remake - news discussion
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!David
* continue gathering {{sma}} corpus texts
* prepare a workshop on South Sámi orthography and grammar (__David__)
** prepare data for each topic (__with Sjur and Trond__)
* call __Ristin Persson__ for permission to use Sámi Radio texts
* stay in touch with UmU about c-thesises in south sami
* Call Fylkesmannen i Nordland
* Translate light version contract to swedish
* Contact Lena Kappfjell and Lajla Mattsson Magga about seminar
* find a conference location for our {{sma}} seminar in Trondheim

!!Jovsset
* write a short e-mail about the release, and send it to our release e-mail list
* get the list of verbs from the auhtors of''Verbh''.
* Find a suitable infrastructure for the distribution of the CD version.
  Possible  through the library bus, the language centres and common
  sami centres in all of Sápmi.
* write formal letter to translator of ''Gåessie dah jeatjebh åerieminie''
* leaflet: review the Windows pictures, and usage instructions for MS Office.
  Review especially the select sami language part.
* Write installation instructions for word 2003
* better Windows usage descriptions, with emphasis on the pitfalls
* work with missing lists

!!Per-Eric
* transfer the {{smj}} texts by __Kurt Tore__ and __Ulf Stefan Winka__ to our
  corpus repository
* follow-up contract from __Lena Davidsson__ 
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Saara
* map oahpa.uit.no to victorio.uit.no/oahpa/
* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* Set up ways of adding meta-information for proofing correct corpus docs
  (source info, used in testing or not, added to lexicon or not)

!!Sjur
* name db/risten.no
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
* InDesign documentation
* continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (with __Ciprian, Trond__)
* Contact ''Davvi Girji'' about cooperation on electronic dictionaries
* subcontractor work for {{sma}} proofing tools, MS and Adobe versions
* support and maintenance contract for {{sme}} and {{smj}}, MS+Adobe tools
* Sámi languages as part of ''Norsk språkbank''
* contact MS Nordic, and ask them to include the Divvun tools in the next Office
  releases
* prepare data for each topic at {{sma}} workshop (__with David and Trond__)
* leaflet: add link to OOo installation and usage instructions
* leaflet: add InDesign text
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Thomas
* check for documents with many red underlines in Nordsalten Avis, and use those
  as gold standard documents for {{smj}} 
* work on and debug compounds in Hunspell
* look at test cases still not behaving properly
* make a Mac installer for the InDesign Divvun tools
* replace InstallShield with an open-source alternative
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Tomi
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
* fix double hyphen bugs
* fix PL hyphenator bugs
* fix PL and Hunspell conversion bugs
* infrastructure remake
* document the error type selection feature in ccat
* make a Mac installer for the InDesign Divvun tools
* replace InstallShield with an open-source alternative
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Trond
* Implement new version of giellatekno front page without ToC (with __Børre__)
* prepare data for each topic at {{sma}} workshop (with __David and Sjur__)
* dictionary discussion on estethics, layout (with __Ciprian__)
* Register oahpa.no
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla].

!!!Pedagogical software online

Meeting memos can be found at 
[http://giellatekno.uit.no/ped/index.html#Meeting+memos]

Working towards the release, in the first week of February. Both the ped tools
and the core {{sme-nob}} dictionary.

oahpa.uit.no should be operative and shall be redirected to
{{victorio.uit.no/oahpa/}}. At the moment, it directs nowhere. Trond discussed
this with Ingeborg. There is a typo, and it is already fixed. So, now both
varieties are registered, and directed to victorio.uit.no.


__TODO__
* Register oahpa.no (__Trond__)
* "bind" oahpa.uit.no to victorio.uit.no (and oapha.uit.no to oahpa.uit.no)
  (__UiT IT team__)
* map oahpa.uit.no to victorio.uit.no/oahpa/ (__Børre, Saara?__)
* Beta test at lib and give feedback (__all__)

!!!Corpus gathering

__TODO:__
* continue gathering {{sma}} corpus texts (__David, Jovsset__)
** __David__ uploaded one book
* transfer the {{smj}} texts by __Kurt Tore__ and __Ulf Stefan Winka__ to our
  corpus repository (__Per-Eric__)
* other contacts: Lena Davidsson, daughter to Lars-Matto Tuolja
* make a 1-page, light version of the contract, also in Swedish
  (__Børre, David, Sjur, Trond__)
** Bokmål and Northern Sami versions are commited at {{xtdoc/sd/src/documentation/content/xdocs/adm/legal/short-contract.(nb|se).xml}}
* discuss infra improvements for corpus rep administration (__Børre, Ciprian__)
** delayed till we are done with the {{gt/Makefile}} improvements
* gather the {{smj}} texts from ''Nord-Salten avis'' (online archive)
  (__Thomas__)
** done
** check for documents with many red underlines, and use those as gold standard
   documents for {{smj}} (__Thomas__)

!!!Promoting Divvun

__TODO:__
* Make a download log (__Børre__)
** progressing, first statistics page available on Wednesday
* make leaflet to inform about the project (__Jovsset, David__)
** better Windows usage descriptions, with emphasis on the pitfalls
   (__Jovsset__)
** add link to OOo installation and usage instructions (__Sjur__)
** improve OOo instructions (__Børre__)
** add Linux info (__Børre__)
** add InDesign text (__Sjur__) - requires installer
** review the Windows pictures, and usage instructions for MS Office 2003
   (__Jovsset__)
*** text (__Jovsset__)
* distribute CD version through the library bus, the language centres and common
  sami centres in all of Sápmi. Gaaltije in Östersund for example.
  (__Leif Åge, Jovsset__)
* contact MS Nordic, and ask them to include the Divvun tools in the next Office
  releases (both Windows and Mac). The integration can/should be done by
  Polderland, which is an official MS subcontractor/integrator. It could be used
  by MS as part of their advertising for the next releases, and it will make it
  much easier for people to get access to the tools. (__Sjur__)
* write a short memo from the meeting with __John Marcus__ (__Jovsset__)

!!!Future plans, directions and ideas

See a separate document in {{plan/strat/5year.jspwiki}}.

!!!Infrastructure

To accomodate future enhancements in different directions (in rough order of
importance):

# test bench for all parts of our language technology efforts
## test bench enhanced, but not yet complet
# set up the Leopard Server features for collaborative support:
## permanent chat rooms
## stored (and indexed) chat transcripts of the chat rooms
## iCal server / group calendars
## wiki
# wiki? on G5 (is part of Leopard Server) or other web-based documentation
# improve Forrest stability and i18n support ( the divvun crashes)
## __Sjur__ has been working on better i18n and pdf rendering
## __Børre__ has some ideas for getting back to serving static html files
# reorganise the documentation:
## differ between target groups
## get better grouping
## decide what to write in forrest and what in wiki
   (cf. [Apertium|http://www.apertium.org/] and 
   [http://xixona.dlsi.ua.es/apertium/]) for a similar split)
## update/add missing parts
# migrate lexc lexicons to XML, splitting the task
## Name lexica (the Name project)
## Dictionaries (already in XML, task is to integrate them)
## At least migrate the lexc open POSes (Komi as a pilot case)
# change the look of the documentation web
# sfst?
## replacement for xfst -> see [omorf
   |http://www.ling.helsinki.fi/kieliteknologia/tutkimus/omor/index.shtml],
   [omorf wiki|https://kitwiki.csc.fi/twiki/bin/view/KitWiki/HfstHome] and
   [omorfi|https://gna.org/projects/omorfi]
## replacement for hunspell/open-source proofing tools
# investigate the [NSIS installer|http://nsis.sourceforge.net/Main_Page],
  potentially replacing the InstallShield
  package from Polderland
# corpus content moved to Max Planck repositories? Norsk språkbank?
# update infrastructure to allow content-restricted spellers for special target
  groups

SVN issues:
* http access not yet available (https only at the moment, but it works as
  anonymous checkout if the user is ''not'' specified)
* read access to the whole repo is working, BUT:
** {{gt/*/polderland}} should be protected
** {{plan}} should be protected
* certain users need to be on the UiT VPN to be able to commit (bug #705)
* UTF-8 problem in svn commit mails: the commit log text is garbled

SVN mail issue:

David still doesn't receive svn mails - his {{.forward}} file doesn't seem to
work.

{{{
original david/.forward (until 10.00 today)
jonasson.david@gmail.com, david

now (from 10.00 today):
david.jonasson@samediggi.no
}}}



__TODO:__
* infrastructure remake: (__Børre, Ciprian, Saara, Sjur, Tomi, Trond__)
** more modularised make / build infra (prepare for smn, sms, sjd, others)
** merge gt, kt and st into one
** modularised preprocess and spellrelax
* make a test-all target that runs all tests we have (__Ciprian, Sjur, Trond__)
** delayed until we have restructured the make/build process
* define and document testing routines (__Ciprian, Sjur, Trond__)
** delayed until we have restructured the make/build process
* follow-up migration to svn:
** close the open SVN repository at requested paths (__Ciprian__)
*** completely closed at the moment, until we have solved the path-based control
** prepare and discuss with external users: Jack Ruether (__Trond__)
* test iCal Server (on G5) (__Børre__)
* remove TOC from the giellatekno home page by using dispatcher (__Trond__)

!!!Linguistics

!!North Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

!!Lule Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

!!South Sámi

__TODO:__
* step two for adjectives (__David, Trond, Sjur__)
* finish reformulating the proper noun grammar like the verbs (__Sjur, Trond__)
* Missing list (focus on closed class words and addition on missing nouns,
  adjectives and verbs) (__David, Jovsset__)
* prepare a workshop on South Sámi orthography and grammar (__David__)
** date: last week of February (23.-27.) seems to work fine with SGL/South Sámi
   branch
** Place: tentatively ''Trondheim'', nothing decided, no meeting rooms ordered
** we'll cover travel and hotel expenses
** we'll invite both SGL and as many of the other key persons in the {{sma}}
   writing/normativity community as possible
** set up a preliminary agenda (__David, Sjur__)
*** check in first sketch
*** send copy of letter to __Sjur__
    the seminar will be held
** prepare data for each topic (__David, Sjur, Trond__)
** prepare open invitation to Trondheim seminar (__David, Sjur__)
* clean the {{smanob}} data (__Trond__ with some help)
* find a conference location for our {{sma}} seminar in Trondheim (__David__)

!!!Name lexicon/risten.no infrastructure

Instead of building our own webforms and back-end update scripts, use XForms
with a premade connection to our xml db. Orbeon XForms is such a tool (open
source).

From the meeting with the terminology and IT teams last week:
* no major rework on the present search interface now
* no work on the editing section; instead:
* add existing lists of sanctioned terminology as separate term entities
* add a dictionary if we can make one with sufficient quality

This means the following tasks:
* find already approved lists, in paper or electronic form (__term team__)
* convert paper lists to electronic lists (__term team__)
* convert lists to standard XML (__Sjur, Tomi__)
* add prepared lists to risten.no (__Sjur, Tomi__)

__TODO:__
# fix i18n bug in risten.no/G5 (so they will work without the proper locale
  request) (__Sjur__)
# fix bugs in lexc2xml; add comments to the log element (__Saara__)
# finish first version of the editing (__Sjur__)
# test editing of the xml files. If ok, then: (__Sjur, Thomas, Trond__)
# make terms-smX.xml <=== automatically from propernoun-sme-lex.xml (add {{nob}}
  as well) (the morphological section should be kept intact, in e.g.
  propernoun-sme-morph.txt) (__Sjur, Saara__)
# convert propernoun-($lang)-lex.txt to a derived file from common xml files
  (__Sjur, Tomi, Saara__)
# implement data synchronisation between [risten.no|http://www.risten.no] and
   the cvs repo, and possibly other servers (ie the G5 as an alternative server
   to the public risten.no - it might be faster and better suited than the
   official one; also local installations could be treated the same way)
# start to use the xml file as source file
# clean terms-sme.xml such that all names have the correct tag for their use
  (e.g. @type=secondary) (__Thomas, linguists__)
# merge placenames which are errouneously in different entries: e.g. Helsinki,
  Helsingfors, Helsset (__linguists__)
# publish the name lexicon on risten.no (__Sjur__)
# add missing parallel names for placenames (__linguists__)
# add informative links between first names like Niillas and Nils
  (__linguists__)

!!Dictionaries

Status
* sma-nob first alpha released internally before Christmas. Needs morphology.
* We need to finish one dictionary till the oahpa release:
** a subset of smenob / nobsme with the Álgosátnegirji and oahpa lemmas.

{{{
		fst		dic
verbs	3938#	1490
nouns	4372*	 979
* = no trans
# = trans to swedish
}}}

#. add the additional verbs, with the swedish translations marked as such
#. add the swedish translations for __all__ verbs
#. add morpho for the whole dict

take both translations? yes

syntax of verb-sma-lex.txt:
{{{lemma:stem CONTLEX "translation" ;}}}

needed in dict: lemma and declension class and translation
declension class (I-VI) can be inferred from the continuation lexicon, the 
relevant class can be found in verb-sma-lex.txt and sma-lex.txt.

Milestone for smanob:
the South Sámi seminar would be a nice opportunity to show our smanob
dictionary, but only if using the Hemnes list seems acceptable by the audience,
both in a legal and linguistic sense. 

__TODO:__
* Continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (__Ciprian, Sjur, Trond__)
* make simple installer applications
* make a public release
** Make a homepage with instructions for dictionary use:
   {{xtdoc/gtuit/src/documentation/content/xdocs/dict.eng.xml}}
** Clarify the difference between local and online dictionaries:
*** Plugin for Firefox and Internet Explorer (online dictionaries)
* Contact Davvi Girji about cooperation on electronic dictionaries (__Sjur__)
* short meeting to go through missing points before a release
  (__Ciprian, Sjur, Trond__)


!!!Proofing tools

!!Hunspell

Beta6 released as part of the 1.1 release of the Divvun tools. Report all bugs
in Bugzilla.

__TODO:__
* work on and debug compounds (__Børre, Thomas__)

!!OpenXSpell

Working everywhere (almost) in MacOS X applications, provides Sámi spell
checking system-wide through a hunspell back-end.
[OpenXSPell|http://www.cygnusblack.co.uk/openxspell/index.html]

There are two issues:
* strings with non-ASCII chars are always flagged
* asking for suggestions on words witn non-ASCII chars crashes OpenXSpell

!!Testing

!Spelling Error Markup

__TODO:__
* Set up ways of adding meta-information (source info, used in testing or not,
  added to lexicon or not) (__Saara__)
* test new and nested error markup (__Sjur__)
** nesting still needs to be tested, depends on new {{ccat}} feature

!Speller testing

__TODO:__
* test the error type selection feature in ccat (__Sjur__)
* document the feature (__Tomi__)

!!Speller bugs

List of bugs returned from Polderland: 621, 630, 652, 656, 676.

Status as of the 1.1 release: __13__ open {{sme}} bugs, __9__ open {{smj}} bugs.

Open issues based on test results:

!sme
Version: __Davvisámi, version 1.1, 2008-12-17__
* 425 - X not recognized; single letters were left out - __OPEN__
* 435 - roman numbers - inflection of single letter numbers
        rejected, as well as some complex numbers (but is ok in {{smj}}) - still
        __OPEN__
** we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
   separate lexicon file
* 581 - consonant doubling - still __OPEN__
* 595 - prefix+name without hyphen (''ovdaLot'' instead of ''ovda-Lot'') - still
        __OPEN__
* 603 - suomabealdi accepted - still __OPEN__
* 606 - __REGRESSION:__ compound-tags LEXICON VUOHTA
* 613 - short gen. as second compound part - still __OPEN__
* 619 - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails - ''vihttasoarttat''
        remaining - still __OPEN__
* 629 - ''a'' taking part in compounding without hyphen - still __OPEN__
** only open case has word ''A-finálaid'' compounded
* 642 - noun/adj/proper + hyphen + ain - still __OPEN__
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still __OPEN__, open case has uppercase letters
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still __OPEN__
* 728 - vowel shortening GenCmp+Left-tagged - still __OPEN__

!smj
Version: __Julevsáme, version 1.1, 2008-12-17__
* 435 - roman number - single letter numbers now recognised
**      we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
        separate lexicon file
**      please note that ''inflection'' of single letter numerals is __fine__ in
        {{smj}}, as opposed to {{sme}}
* 595 - prefix+name as split comp without hyphen - still __OPEN__
* 596 - __REGRESSION:__ C-giellan is not accepted
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still __OPEN__, open case has uppercase letters
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still __OPEN__
* 650 - noun prefix+name compound without hyphen - still __OPEN__
* 652 - UPPERCASE-typos only get acronym-suggestions - still __OPEN__
* 692 - numeral-variants - all but one fixed (''gáktsalågenantjuotakta''), but
        still __OPEN__
* 711 - __REGRESSION:__ numeral compounds and cases (''10-biejvvásattja'')

__TODO:__
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion (__Tomi__)

!!Hyphenator bugs

Open issues based on test results :

!sme
Lexicon version: __Davvisámi, version 1.1, 2008-12-17__
* 468 -''Márkomeanu'' - still __OPEN__
* 547 - hyphen in front of vowel: ''Lotnolasealáhusas'' - still __OPEN__
* 548 - mid syllable hyphenation: ''Háliidivččen'' - still __OPEN__
* 549 - division without hyph: ''Váccedettiin'' - still __OPEN__

!smj
Lexicon version: __Julevsáme, version 1.1, 2008-12-17__
* 547 - hyphen in front of vowel: ''Jienastimnjuolgadusá'' and ''Orgánajs'' -
        still __OPEN__
* 670 - Hard hyphen replaced with soft hyphen: ''10-biejvvásattja'' (the word is
        not rec.; Bug #711) - still __OPEN__

__TODO:__
* fix PL hyphenator errors (__Tomi__)

!!Installer changes

__TODO:__
* make a Mac installer for the InDesign Divvun tools (__Tomi__)
* replace InstallShield with an open-source alternative (__Tomi__)

!!User documentation

__TODO:__
* InDesign documentation (__Sjur__)
** Norwegian translation received from Davvi Girji

!!1.1 Release
To be added to the release e-mail:

"The 1.1 release also includes beta 6 of our Hunspell/OpenOffice spellers for
North and Julev Sámi. They do contain known bugs, but they are already quite
useful."

__TODO:__
* write a short e-mail about the release, and send it to our release e-mail list
  (__Jovsset, Thomas__)

!!!Other

!!Sámi week in Tromsø

__Sigbjørn Skåden__ has asked the UiT gang to demonstrate etc at the Tromsø city
Library as a part of that week and the happenings at the Library. The week
around February 6th (February 2-8). Sounds like a good idea, we will be there.

* ped tools
* Sámi dictionaries
* Sámi proofing tools
* other things?
* European Charter for regional languages will have a meeting, Jovvset and Trond
  are going there

!Launch ped + dict
* interviews with media
* library - demos
* talk at univ, wednesday (Trond)

!!Text to speech

Antti has hinted at the possibility of doing beta versions of other 
languages as well. We are thus now recording Greenlandic sentences. A further
possibility would be smj, sma, this would require phon-smX.xfst files for
these languages as well (a couple of days' work for smj, more for sma), plus
recording.

!!Corpus contracts + open source

Postponed until the svn repository is fully functional (it is too open now).

!!!Next meeting, closing

The next meeting is 19.1.2009, 9.30 Norwegian time.

__David__ possibly away next Monday.

The meeting was closed at 11:38.

!!!Appendix - task lists for the next five days

!!Boerre
[iCal|/doc/admin/weekly/2009/Tasks_2009-01-19_Boerre.ics]
* map oahpa.uit.no to victorio.uit.no/oahpa/
* work on and debug compounds in Hunspell
* leaflet: add Linux info
* Make a divvun-tools download log
* {{gt/Makefile}} remake
* fine tune suggestions
* improve OOo instructions
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Ciprian
[iCal|/doc/admin/weekly/2009/Tasks_2009-01-19_Ciprian.ics]
* close the open SVN repository at requested paths
* improve processing of new corpus documents
* make the pipeline of ''StarDict'' dictionary generation running on the Mac
* update the Makefile for generating dictionaries (related to the dictionary
  infrastructure task)
* take care of the error logging during conversion process
* look at the xml conversion quality
* make a list of (general and special) problems related with 
  converting docs into xml-forat and adding them to the corpora
* continue the search and testing of an appropriate tool for 
  lexicon working (no xml-file editing via text editors!)
* build the intelligent sma:nob dict in mac-format
* build the sami-week-version of sme:nob in all formats
* infrastructure remake - news discussion
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!David
[iCal|/doc/admin/weekly/2009/Tasks_2009-01-19_David.ics]
* continue gathering {{sma}} corpus texts
* prepare a workshop on South Sámi orthography and grammar (__David__)
** prepare data for each topic (__with Sjur and Trond__)
* call __Ristin Persson__ for permission to use Sámi Radio texts
* stay in touch with UmU about c-thesises in south sami
* Call Fylkesmannen i Nordland
* Translate light version contract to swedish
* Contact Lena Kappfjell and Lajla Mattsson Magga about seminar
* find a conference location for our {{sma}} seminar in Trondheim

!!Jovsset
[iCal|/doc/admin/weekly/2009/Tasks_2009-01-19_Jovsset.ics]
* write a short e-mail about the release, and send it to our release e-mail list
* get the list of verbs from the auhtors of''Verbh''.
* Find a suitable infrastructure for the distribution of the CD version.
  Possible  through the library bus, the language centres and common
  sami centres in all of Sápmi.
* write formal letter to translator of ''Gåessie dah jeatjebh åerieminie''
* leaflet: review the Windows pictures, and usage instructions for MS Office.
  Review especially the select sami language part.
* Write installation instructions for word 2003
* better Windows usage descriptions, with emphasis on the pitfalls
* work with missing lists

!!Per-Eric
* transfer the {{smj}} texts by __Kurt Tore__ and __Ulf Stefan Winka__ to our
  corpus repository
* follow-up contract from __Lena Davidsson__ 
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Saara
* map oahpa.uit.no to victorio.uit.no/oahpa/
* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* Set up ways of adding meta-information for proofing correct corpus docs
  (source info, used in testing or not, added to lexicon or not)

!!Sjur
[iCal|/doc/admin/weekly/2009/Tasks_2009-01-19_Sjur.ics]
* name db/risten.no
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
* InDesign documentation
* continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (with __Ciprian, Trond__)
* Contact ''Davvi Girji'' about cooperation on electronic dictionaries
* subcontractor work for {{sma}} proofing tools, MS and Adobe versions
* support and maintenance contract for {{sme}} and {{smj}}, MS+Adobe tools
* Sámi languages as part of ''Norsk språkbank''
* contact MS Nordic, and ask them to include the Divvun tools in the next Office
  releases
* prepare data for each topic at {{sma}} workshop (__with David and Trond__)
* leaflet: add link to OOo installation and usage instructions
* leaflet: add InDesign text
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Thomas
* check for documents with many red underlines in Nordsalten Avis, and use those
  as gold standard documents for {{smj}} 
* work on and debug compounds in Hunspell
* look at test cases still not behaving properly
* make a Mac installer for the InDesign Divvun tools
* replace InstallShield with an open-source alternative
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Tomi
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
* fix double hyphen bugs
* fix PL hyphenator bugs
* fix PL and Hunspell conversion bugs
* infrastructure remake
* document the error type selection feature in ccat
* make a Mac installer for the InDesign Divvun tools
* replace InstallShield with an open-source alternative
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Trond
[iCal|/doc/admin/weekly/2009/Tasks_2009-01-19_Trond.ics]
* Implement new version of giellatekno front page without ToC (with __Børre__)
* prepare data for each topic at {{sma}} workshop (with __David and Sjur__)
* dictionary discussion on estethics, layout (with __Ciprian__)
* Register oahpa.no
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla].
