# Meeting setup

* Date: 26.09.2005
* Time: 10.00 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are :-)
* Tools: iChat, SubEthaEdit

#  Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from two weeks ago
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. Speller infrastructure
1. Other issues
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 10:10.

Present: **Børre, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi, Trond**

Absent: **Maaren, Saara**

Main secretary: **Sjur**

Agenda accepted as is.

# 2. Reviewing the task list from the last meeting

##  Børre
* Finish crontab specification for the cvs update/export script **Tomi** made
    -  Finished the divvun2web script and set up the cronjob
    -  It seems to work, but needs a better reporting features.
* Contact Svenska bibelsällskapet / **Olavi Korhonen**
    -  Kjell Hognesius had the files (only pdf). They were converted to .rtf format
    and returned so they can do their own finetuning on them.
* discuss with **Anders Kintel** about possible cooperation
    -  Not done
* Follow up on CVS mailing:
    - Have a look at why **Maaren** and **Thomas** get two copies of every
    samicvs mail.
        - Maaren had setup both a pop and exchange account to the samediggi.
* Contact oahpahusossodat and the rest of the SD about texts
    -  Sent an internal note to the main departments inside the SD.
* Document the corpus infrastructure
    -  Not done
* Read through the Helsinki contracts (new translations)
    -  Done, sent some comments to **Sjur** and **Trond**.
* Reorganise the directory structure
    -  Some work done, sitting on my machine
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
    -  Not done
* Other things done
    -  Learned how to use WebSak.
    -  Talked to **Ellen Näkkäläjärvi** about getting texts from the Finnish sámi
    parliament. She agreed on finding and sending texts to us.
    -  Gathered texts from the Guovdageaidnu municipality

##  Maaren
* The missing list, both the overall missing list from our xml corpus, and a
  file-for-file review, in order to get different terminology. do it next week
    - shall do it next week
* shall get mainly through the missing list from risten.no this week
    - working with risten.no this week also
* Start working on grammatical issues with **Thomas** and **Trond**
**shall do it this week or next week?
* Work on the name project with **Trond** and **Sjur**
**okei okei
* Start looking at normativity issues
**shall do it this week
* Work on the numerals project with **Trond**
**shall contact Trond

##  Saara
* Look at the corpus infrastructure issue
    - Done
* Look at the corpus interface issue with **Lars**
    - Done, the development of the interface is going on well. The
interface to the grammatical data (tags, etc.) is controlled by
us. The aim of the metadata interface is to be suitable to a wide
range of corpora, and it seems that it suits us too. I was not able to
get any specification of the metadata interface, but the metadata
specification Lars proposed corresponds to our dtd.
* Convert texts from .doc to .xml, to get a grasp of our corpus format
    - I did not convert any documents, but I am now very familiar with the format.
* Have a look at the pdf-to-xml issue
    - The metadata is extracted when it is available in the
pdf-document. The structural information that can be extracted is
headers and paragraphs but only afterwards by perl. Working with a
Perl module to handle the character coding issues.

##  Sjur
* risten.no bugs and fixes
    - nothing
* complete the action summary after our half-year evaluation
* follow up on:
    - voice group-chat not working to Sámediggi
        - Now awaiting cost evaluation from the IT guys (**Geir Kaaby** et al)
* To the board:
    - write draft specification for the outsourced tasks
        - Redefined as:
        - qualification criterias - done
        - selection criterias - done
        - deliverables - partly done, required for the board?
        - requirements specification - not done, and not required for the board
    - write half-yearly project report with progress and bugdet status
        - done
    - Added: write project sketch/proposal for South Sámi spellers, with budget
        - started
* project planning with **Trond**
    - not done
* Work on the name project with **Trond** and **Maaren**
    - not done
* Prepare for a Lule Sámi meeting with Árran
    - not done
* Follow up on place names from Norge Digitalt
    - waiting for the material
* Read through the Helsinki contracts (new translations)
    - done - several remarks and questions discussed with Trond
* Talk to **Bitte** about the Lule Sámi lexicon
    - done. She will read the contract
* Evaluate SFST as speller (and analyzer) lexicon
    - still postponed.
* prepare for the Guovdageaidnu meeting:
    - name lexicon
    - three-part compounds
    - not done
* e-mail **Kimmo Koskenniemi** about contract issues
    - done
* other tasks:
    - discussed twol testing with **Trond**
    - started to work on a South Sámi speller project description, to be presented
   to the board

##  Thomas
* work on Lule Sami compounding and derivation
**worked and still working
* Look at Linguistic bugs with **Trond**.
**not worked with bugs last week
* Prepare for a Lule Sámi meeting with Árran
**not done

##  Tomi
* Aspell: Continue working on the affix file & aspell
    - Trying to solve the UTF-8
    - Got e-mail from **Roy Dragseth**, that he had to terminate the
   aspell processes I had left running on cochise after work,
   because they consumed all the memory.
    - Contact aspell author (UTF-8 thing)
        - There's also a aspell-dev list, perhaps that's the right forum. (Comment
    from **Børre**)
        - I have subscribed to aspell-user list
        - Not done
* three-part compounding
    - Not done
* corpus infrastructure: dtd location (both public and internal)
    - Not done
* corpus infrastructure: file and dir organisation
    - Not done
* Document aspell and corpus infrastructure
    - This has been done to some extent
* Add html-to-xml conversion to corpus infra
    - Waiting the pdf-to-xml results
        - **Sjur**: There's no reason to wait except priorities, is there?
* Other issues:
    - Cleaned up the aspell structure
    - Implemented a new testing routine for twol-files

##  Trond
* Work on the bug list.
    - The last bug fix -- from any of us -- is from Sept 14th :-(
* Work on compounds (three-part, with **Tomi**)
    - Not done.
* Work on the corpus interface (with **Lars** and **Saara**)
    - Have discussed with **Saara**, but not with **Lars**.
* Work on the name agreement with "Norge digitalt" with **Thomas**
    - Not done.
        - This one is now on Sjur's table
* Look at the linguistic aspects of the speller clitics
    - Done. They are trivial.
* Get the new version of the New Testament
    - Still open.
* Introduce the new coworker to the work routines
    - The new coworker withdrew his application, and this issue has thus taken most
   of the week. It seems we have been able to get a stand-in for him.
* project planning with **Sjur**
    - Not done.
* Work on the name project with **Maaren** and **Sjur**
    - Not done.
* Prepare for a Lule Sámi meeting with Árran
    - Not done.
* Work on the numerals project with **Maaren**
* Prepare for three-part compounds meeting in Guovdageaidnu
    - Not done.
* Other issues:
    - Made a new testing routine for our twol-files, made a test suite for sme, and
   debugged it. **Tomi** has made an interface for it.
    - Discussed legal issues.
    - Worked on the lexicon.

# 3. Documentation

Documentation tasks:

1. Add documentation on our corpus infrastructure and our corpus work in general
  ("To be done by the ones making the corpora": **Børre**, **Tomi**, **Trond**,
  **Saara**).
1. Now  we have 4 documents:
    1. Correct corpus (disamb usage)
    1. Corpus plan (for the disamb corpus cwb)
    1. Corpus conversion
    1. catxml

For the basic corpora, we need 3 types of documentation, or doc for 3 target
groups:

1. For the users/linguists:
    1. What corpus are found, how do I use them (this info is now scattered)
1. For the collectors:
    1. How do I add texts, where do I add them, how do I convert them (this is the
   Corpus conversion doc)
1. For the programmer
    1. What did I actually do? (this is partly the catxml doc)

For the work on the graphical user interface, we need documentation as well, in
principle along the same lines, except that the user is not the same linguist
as above.

1. add/update Aspell documentation (**Tomi**)
1. finish divvun2web script (**Børre**)
    1.  the cronjob is up an working. It needs a better error reporting mechanism,
    though.
1. as always: document what you're doing:-) (**all**)

Crontab:

Do we need validation upon cvs check-in? What about forrestbot?
An xml validation check (acc to our dtd) is a good thing. We would like that
to be implemented.

We need better error reporting, and errors should preferably be caught before
cvs commit.

**Børre**:
* add cvs commit xml validation
* look into how divvun2web can provide (better) error messages, or look at
  forrestbot

# 4. Corpus gathering

See [notes from the 12.9. meeting](Meeting_2005-09-12.html#4.+Corpus+gathering)
for details about the steps forward.

## Contracts

Tasks:
* read through Trond's translations (**Børre**, **Sjur**)
    - Done, and commented
* e-mail Kimmo Koskenniemi about the missing fourth contract, and about
  unclear paragraphs in the versions received (**Sjur**).
    - Done
* contact lawyers (find suitable lawyers, **Trond** will start with the
  university)
* send the license text to lawyers
    -  These should be sent to the university lawyers, as the sámediggi ones
    are overloaded with work.
* add a background document explaining the model

The most problematic issue:

Who has the copyright of extracted material, like single words, collections of
words, syntactic structure (potentially with some words filled in)? We need
this to be controlled by us, not by the authors. The exact borderline is hard
to define.

We will send the contracts as is to the lawyers, in parallel with waiting for
comments from Kimmo. The SD lawyers will be glad to *not* get this task, as
they're overloaded as is.

## Lule Sámi New Testament

**Børre** has converted the translation (which was only available in pdf) to
rtf, and sent the files back to Bibelsällskapet for corrections.

# 5. Corpus infrastructure

## Naming conventions and directory structure

See [notes from the 12.9.
meeting|Meeting_2005-09-12.html#Naming+conventions+and+directory+structure]
for details about the decision and implementation, as well as a list of tasks.

**Børre** has done some work, but it is only locally on his machine. Some more
discussions with **Trond** must be done before these are copied to cochise.

## Corpus conversion

### Pdf to XML

Extraction priority list
1. retain correct Sámi characters: ok
1. retain word and sentence order: ok
1. retain paragraph order: ok
1. retain structure
    1. paragraphs: ok, by perl
    1. titles, headers: ok, by perl
    1. metadata (author, year, etc.): ok, when it is present in the document
    1. lists: no
    1. tables: no

A Perl module for character conversions
*   **Saara** proposes a Perl module that handles the character coding
    issues. The pdf conversion faces the same problems with
    e.g. Latin-6 character codes are present in the doc
    to xml conversion as well, so a module would be a good idea. (I got
    the impression from the word2xml.pl script, that some problems
    with the characters still remain.) I try to make the module so
    general that it suits to html character conversions later on. What
    do you think?

Problems found so far using open-source tools:
* paragraphs are correctly ordered, but not separated (i.e. one long
paragraph): solved
* no structure: parsed afterwards

Tasks:
* **Børre** and **Saara** to discuss what perhaps is two different approaches
  to this,
* and evaluate differences and strengths.

### HTML to XML

* we already have some tools according to **Saara**
* this is anyway easy, as HTML provides us with the structure we need
* what is needed is a transformation to our XML, + adding the metadata as usual
* it can wait at least a week or two (after pdf conversion is mostly done)

# 6. Linguistics

## Name lexicon

See [notes from the 12.9. meeting](Meeting_2005-09-12.html#6.+Linguistics)

## Place name summary

**Sjur** needs a short resumé of the present status wrt the parallel place
names. The resumé will be given to the project board for information. This is
the situation:

* Finland: we have received all names, in North Sámi and Finnish. What
  about Inari and Skolt Sámi place names? **Børre** will find out what we
  received, and whether it contained Inari and Skolt Sámi. Today:-)
* Sweden: the transcription (from old to new orthogr.) is finished, now the
  names are identified as Sámi ones. Have we made it clear that we need parallel
  names (i.e. the Swedish (Finnish/Meänkieli) parallel as well? No. Can they
  deliver parallel names?
  We don't know (yet). **Thomas** will ask.
* Norway: we have received all Sámi names, but the CD is unreadable (we have
  earlier received a partial list of all names in all Sámi languages, reflecting
  the status quo of the orthography conversion 3 years ago).
* We can not get any parallel listing directly from Statens kartverk,
  but **Øystein Johannessen** has promised to help us through Norge Digitalt.
  As of today, nothing new has been heard.

Conclusion: it has been much easier to get place names from Finland and Sweden
than anticipated, and so far without any costs on the project. So far, the
place names have been the single most important contribution from Finland
and Sweden for this project.

## North Sámi

* three-part compounds issue still open, as are the name and number projects.
    - **Trond, Maaren, Sjur** will look into this in Guovdageaidnu
* **Johnny Andersen** has written a letter to us on the treatment of Sámi place
  names, we need a contract with "Norge digitalt", via UFD. We will have to
  get such an agreement. This is a task for **Thomas** and **Trond**.
    - **Sjur** has written an e-mail to the UFD contact person,
   **Øystein Johannessen,** who will look into it soon.
* normativity issues:
    - the Giellalávdegoddi meeting is in October sometime

## Lule Sámi

* we need a lexicon
* compounding and derivation
    - **Thomas** has finished with deverbals, now working with denominals
    - most likely the same three-part compound problem in Lule Sámi as well
   (the middle stem shortens to a stem only found in such compounds)
    - it is possible that even the first stem shortens the same way
* Suffix boundary symbol has not been added, we are not sure whether we should
  do that.

## Numerals

1. An empirical overview
    1. Numeral generation
    1. Numeral inflection
    1. Numerals as parts of compounds
1. A clear concept of how we want to treat them
    1. Tagging
1. A treatment

# 7. Speller infrastructure

## Aspell

Write documentation here as well.

The munch-list is working, and the affix file is improving. See [15.8. meeting
memo|/admin/weekly/2005/Meeting_2005-08-15.html] for more.

Got an e-mail from **Roy Dragseth**, that he had to terminate the aspell
processes **Tomi** had left running on cochise after work, because they consumed
all the memory.

See [12.9. meeting memo](/admin/weekly/2005/Meeting_2005-09-12.html#Aspell) for
a list of open issues.

# 8. Other

## Technical issues

* The mac os / perl bug (at least **Trond** and **Sjur** has it):
    - utf8 "\xC4" does not map to Unicode at /Users/trond/gt/script/preprocess line
   82. This msg did not show up in 10.3 (perl 5.8.1), but does so in 10.4 (perl
   5.8.6). It is probably a perl - OS mismatch. (**Trond**, **Thor Øivind**,
   **Tomi**)
        - Another **example:**
        - :"\x{00c3}" does not map to utf8 at ../script/preprocess line 113, <> chunk
    33.
* CVS mailing to **Maaren**:
    - it is working, but she receives two copies of every message. I don't know
   why. It is a minor annoyance, but needs to be looked into. **Thomas** has the
   same problem. **Børre** will look into it (get rid of the double copies).
        - is **Thomas** also set up with a double set of e-mail accounts?
        - **Thomas** has two mail accounts. Not sure if that's the problem.

## Bug fixing

* 13 open bugs (and 24 risten.no bugs) - it seems **Sjur** can need some help
  with bug fixing in risten.no:-) (note: some of them are feature requests more
  than real bugs)
* some bugs are not real, but just not closed yet even though they are fixed.
  Please have a look at all the bugs you are assigned to. Do we need to set up
  an automatic reminder system? Something like sending an e-mail if the bug has
  been open and untouched for more than X weeks?
    - **Børre** has not checked his bugs last week:-)
    - **Thomas** never has bugs, they go to Trond.
    - **Tomi** has - good!
    - **Sjur** has not - bad:-(
* **Børre** to ask **Thor Øyvind** to configure Bugzilla to send e-mail
  reminders for open bugs not touched in a month.

## Buying

* new external screens for all Divvun workers
* rugsacks for all? Yes.

# 9. Summary, task list

##  Børre
* discuss with **Anders Kintel** about possible cooperation
* Follow up on CVS mailing:
    - Have a look at why **Maaren** and **Thomas** get two copies of every samicvs
   mail.
* Contact oahpahusossodat and the rest of the SD about texts
    -  Contact these to clarify details on how to gather the texts
* Document the corpus infrastructure
* Reorganise the directory structure
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
* Contact **Saara** about pdf conversions.
* Have a look at the placenames files.
* **Børre** to ask **Thor Øyvind** to configure Bugzilla to send e-mail
  reminders for open bugs not touched in a month.
* add cvs commit xml validation
* look into how divvun2web can provide (better) error messages, or look at
  forrestbot
* **Børre** and **Saara** to discuss what perhaps is two different approaches
  to corpus conversion, and evaluate differences and strengths.

##  Maaren
* The missing list, both the overall missing list from our xml corpus, and a
  file-for-file review, in order to get different terminology.
    - shall do it next week
* shall get mainly through the missing list from risten.no this week
    - working with risten.no this week also
* Start working on grammatical issues with **Thomas** and **Trond**
**shall do it this week or next week?
* Work on the name project with **Trond** and **Sjur**
**okei okei
* Start looking at normativity issues
**shall do it this week
* Work on the numerals project with **Trond**
**shall contact Trond

##  Saara
* Look at the corpus infrastructure issue
* Look at the corpus interface issue with Lars
* Convert texts from .doc to .xml, to get a grasp of our corpus format
* Have a look at the pdf-to-xml issue
    - use the priority list earlier in the memo for a guidance
* **Børre** and **Saara** to discuss what perhaps is two different approaches
  to corpus conversion, and evaluate differences and strengths.

##  Sjur
* risten.no bugs and fixes
* complete the action summary after our half-year evaluation
* follow up on:
    - voice group-chat not working to Sámediggi
        - Now awaiting cost evaluation from the IT guys (**Geir Kaaby** et al)
* To the board:
    - place name status
    - south sami project draft
    - deliverables
    - check the memo from the last meeting
* project planning with **Trond**
* Work on the name project with **Trond** and **Maaren**
* Prepare for a Lule Sámi meeting with Árran
* Follow up on place names from Norge Digitalt
* Evaluate SFST as speller (and analyzer) lexicon
* prepare for the Guovdageaidnu meeting:
    - name lexicon
    - three-part compounds

##  Thomas
* work on Lule Sami compounding and derivation
* Look at Linguistic bugs with **Trond**.
* Prepare for a Lule Sámi meeting with Árran

##  Tomi
* Aspell: Continue working on the affix file & aspell
    - Contact aspell author (UTF-8 thing)
* three-part compounding
* corpus infrastructure: dtd location (both public and internal)
* corpus infrastructure: file and dir organisation
* Document aspell and corpus infrastructure
* Add html-to-xml conversion to corpus infra

##  Trond
* Work on the bug list (11 open).
* Work on compounds (three-part, with **Tomi**)
* Work on the corpus interface (with **Lars** and **Saara**)
* Work on the name agreement with "Norge digitalt" with **Thomas**
* Get the new version of the New Testament
* Introduce the new coworker to the work routines
* project planning with **Sjur**
* Work on the name project with **Maaren** and **Sjur**
* Prepare for a Lule Sámi meeting with Árran
* Work on the numerals project with **Maaren**
* Prepare for three-part compounds meeting in Guovdageaidnu
* Contact the University lawyers for comments on the contract
* Set up testing procedures for the disambiguator.

# 10. Next meeting, closing

03.10.2005 10:00

Closed at 11:53
