# Meeting setup

* Date: 08.02.2005
* Time: 10.00 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are:-)
* Tools: Phone, iChat, SubEthaEdit

# Agenda

1.  Opening, agenda review
1.  Infrastructure:
##	documentation system status - still issues open?
##	still UTF-8 issues?
##	physical infrastructure - network for Thomas & Maaren?
	  (still big problems in the Samediggi network, although
	   things have improved)
1.  Corpus gathering
1.  Corpus infrastructure
1.  Linguistics
1.  Term db:
##	grammar(s)
##	db editing
1.  Other issues
1.  Summary, task lists
1.  Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review

Started 10.05

# 2. Infrastructure:

* documentation system status - still issues open? Børre:
    -        has written a how-to about installing Forrest, and started to
          write the how-to about writing and using Forrest as a documentation
          tool (menues and tabs)
    -        disamb project will get its own Forrest structure today
    -        divvun.no needs to be set up
* still UTF-8 issues?
    -    Use only .profile! (no .bashrc)
    -    sorting in cochise: Finnish-based now, put into .profile:
```
      export LC_ALL=se_NO.UTF-8 
      (The locale will have to build it first with
      this command only once, by the superuser): 
      localedef -i /usr/share/i18n/locales/se_NO -c -f UTF-8 se_NO.UTF-8)
      To test if the se_NO.UTF-8 locale works:
      cat text | LC_ALL=se_NO.UTF-8 sort | less
      ~/.emacs: 
      (setq locale-coding-system 'utf-8)
      subtopic: Sámi sorting in emacs
```
    -    kwic-snt does not align correctly with UTF-8. Does this work?:
```      LC_ALL=se_NO.UTF-8 kwic-snt ```
* physical infrastructure - network for Thomas & Maaren?
  (still big problems in the Samediggi network, although
   things have improved)
    -    news reading still not working
* CVS: many generated files not ignored - to be followed

# 3. Corpus gathering

More addresses gathered. Asked Anne Britt to send the letter
now to the ones we have the address of. No response so far.

Finnish addresses still missing.

**Thomas:** called Anders Kintel, positive to share his work, but has
    legal questions. Thomas has sent Børre's letter, will call him
    again.

# 4. Corpus infrastructure

Tomi has been reading Saara's notes, and the CSC site, getting into
the DTD now.

Will construct a tree of the document structure.

Tiger-XML:
[http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/projekte/TIGER/]

TEI:
[http://www.tei-c.org/]

Schema types:
* RelaxNG (simple format)
* XML Schemas (w3)

# 5. Linguistics

Working with Trond's list and adjectives.

Normativity is still an open question in many cases. Orthographic
status can (and should) be tagged in the disambiguator output. To
be discussed.

# 6. Term db

* grammar(s):
    -    North Sámi is roughly finished
    -    Lule and South Sámi in the works
* db editing:
    -    making progress, soon to be able to edit:-)

# 7. Other issues

* Tromsø trip for Maaren and Thomas: they would like to go. It's good
  for the project, and they will continue the planning with Trond.
* Two students: Ilona working 15-20%, Lena (native speaker) will work
  on the verb lexicons.
* Meeting memos into the documentation, will thus be public. To be
  converted to wiki format 

# 8. Summary, task lists

TODO:
* Sjur + Børre: set up divvun.no
* All: use only .profile (no .bashrc!) -> into the documentation
* Børre, Trond, all: continue to update the documentation of setting
      up machines and working environment
* Tomi, Trond: to clean the documentation from references to the old 7/8-bit
      system, and convert them to proper documentation for the present UTF-8
* Tomi, Børre, Trond: discuss the use of .profile and .bashrc in cochise
* Tomi, Børre, Trond: sorting in Emacs, SubEthaEdit and command line
* Trond to call Erling Paulsen (news group problem)
* Børre to call Anne Britt about corpus letter
* Tomi to lead the discussion on corpus infrastructure, DTDs vs Schemas, etc
* Sjur, Trond, Tomi, Marit: Orthographic status (misspelled) tags
      in the disamb output?
* Sjur, Børre: set up a suitable format for the meeting memos for easy
      publishing in Forrest.

# 9. Closing

Next meeting: Monday 14.2., 10 AM.

Closed at 11.30.
