# Meeting setup

* Date: 18.04.2005
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are :-)
* Tools: Phone, iChat, SubEthaEdit

#  Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Vacation
1. Gathering in May
1. Reviewing the task list from a week ago
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. Term db
1. Other issues
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# Task list since last meeting:

* **All**:
    -  Follow up the corpus format discussion.
    -  Decide upon vacation time
    -  Views on physical meeting place (May meeting)
* **Tomi**:
    -  Waiting for the corpus xml-format verification, to complete xml-conversion
    script(s) after that
* **Børre**:
    -  Contact Kimmo Koskenniemi and Ruth Vatvedt Fjeld about contract
    -  Follow up on the divvun.no issue, suggest tomcat and .war files
    -  Work on the termdb
    -  Find a solution for wiki and utf-8
    -  Link problems in forrest
    -  Contact Min Áigi, discuss technical details
* **Maaren**: tries to work with the missing list. Else?
* **Thomas**: work with verb transitivity
* **Sjur**:
    -  terminology db
    -  text license contract
    -  divvun.no

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 09.32. Agenda accepted as is.

Present: Maaren, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi, Trond, Børre

Main secretary: Børre

# 2. Vacation

*  Børre: From the middle of June to the middle of July (tentatively)
*  Maaren: Vacation in July, four or five weeks. From week 28 (11.7.-)
*  Thomas: From the 11th of July to the 15th of august. Moving to Tromsø in the
   beginning of June, if he finds house where to live til then.
*  Sjur: From the 20th of July to the 10th august (cirka)
*  Tomi: If I can borrow vacation weeks, then 2 weeks after mihcamáraid.

Vacation table:

|   Name |13.-17.6|20.-24.6|27.6-1.7|4.-8.7|11.-15.7|18.-22.7|25.-29.7|1.-5.8|8.-12.8|15.-19.8
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | ---
|  Børre  | O | X | X | X | X | O | O | O | O | O
|  Maaren | O | O | O | O | X | X | X | X | X?| O
|  Thomas | O | O | O | O | X | X | X | X | X | O
|  Sjur   | O | O | O | O | O | x | X | X | x | O
|  Tomi   | O | O | X | X | O | O | O | O | O | O

# 3. Gathering in May

The meeting will last for three full days, from the 25th of May to the 27th of May.

## Topics:
* Install/check 10.4
* Review of the first half year
    - Discussion of what works well and not so well
    - How/what to improve
    - The corpus gathering process

* Linguistic discussions
    - Discuss and plan the Lule-Sámi work

## Place: Alternatives: Tromsø and Guovdageaidnu
We set the meeting place to Guovdageaidnu. The next meeting will be in Tromsø.

# 4. Reviewing the task list from the last meeting

* **All**:
    -  Follow up the corpus format discussion.
        - New meeting today
    -  Decide upon vacation time
        - Done
    -  Views on physical meeting place (May meeting)
        - Done
* **Tomi**:
    -  Waiting for the corpus xml-format verification, to complete xml-conversion
    script(s) after that
    -  Script is ready
        - Details in meeting later today
* **Børre**:
    -  Contact Kimmo Koskenniemi and Ruth Vatvedt Fjeld about contract
        - Delayed to this week
    -  Follow up on the divvun.no issue, suggest tomcat and .war files
        - Closer discussions this week
    -  Work on the termdb
        - This one's almost done
        - How to get "title=" in to the menu.
    -  Find a solution for wiki and utf-8
        - Seems to be a locale problem. We'll see if the problems are fixed in Tiger.
    -  Link problems in forrest
        - Will get done this week
    -  Contact Min Áigi, discuss technical details
        - Talked to Svein Nordsletta, and they continue their corpus gathering. The technical
    details on how we aquire the material will be done when we have signed a contract.
    -  Went to Pargas
* **Maaren**: tries to work with the missing list.
    -  Went to Pargas, worked with the 'missing' list, helped Thomas
* **Thomas**: work with verb transitivity
    -  Continued with it
    -  Active discussion on the news group.
* **Sjur**:
    -  terminology db
        - Editing complete enough to be workable
        - Editing did not work upon installation + UTF-8 problems
    -  text license contract
        - Nothing done
    -  divvun.no
        - Nothing done
    -  Went to Pargas

# 5. Documentation - divvun.no

* The external pages of the univ project should be moved to forrest
    - Børre has done some work on this, Trond and Børre should review the work.

* The Lucene search works for the technically inclined.
    - The rest of us should probably index the site again.

* We should remove the old doc-pages as we proceed

* Deadline for opening www.divvun.no and reopening www.giellatekno.no.
    - Discussions with the webserver administrator will decide upon this issue.

* Continue disc on deployment options

# 6. Corpus gathering

We still need a license!!!

Børre has been in contact with Iđut (Åge Persen). They/he was very positive towards
the project.

# 7. Corpus infrastructure

Topic for meeting later today.

# 8. Linguistics
* All said? Mostly, see above.
* The missing lists should be completed when we now have got new texts.
* There are more POS to be checked, e.g. indefinite pronouns. We need a more
  structured TODO-section in the documentation.

# 9. Term db

* Editing mostly finished, but still isssues and technical problems
* Minor issues with the skin.

# 10. Other issues

## http://beta.visl.sdu.dk/ (Comments to follow)

Sámi sentences from Nickel's grammar have been incorporated.
An Alfa version of syntactic analysis (interactive) is available

## Mouse problems

* Pointer not following – change batteries

# 11. Summary, task list

## TODO:

* **All**: report vacation plans
* **Trond, Børre, Sjur and Tomi**
    - A session on the corpus format.
* **Børre**
    - Contact Kimmo Koskenniemi and Ruth Vatvedt Fjeld about contracts
    - Fix the link problems in the documentation.
    - Further discussion with web serer administrator about the divvun.no site.
    - Some minor things with termdb.
    - Review giellatekno.no site suggestion with Trond.
* **Tomi**:
    -  continue corpus discussion
* **Maaren**: tries to work with the missing list. Else?
* **Thomas**: work with verb transitivity
* **Sjur**:
    -  terminology db
    -  text license contract
    -  divvun.no

# 12. Next meeting, closing

02.05.2005 10.00

Closed at 11.07.
