# Meeting setup

* Date: 28.02.2005
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are:-)
* Tools: Phone, iChat, SubEthaEdit

#  Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from a week ago (see below)
1. Documentation:
    1. are we ready to remove the old HTML docs?
    1. is the Wiki format for meeting memos ok?
    That is, can it be used during the meeting?
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. Language technology:
    1. compilation problems on cochise
1. Term db
1. Other issues:
    1. Pargas seminar: who is going?
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# Last week's task list:

* **Børre**: suggest port numbers in the documentations
* Continue .profile discussion in news, conclusion this week
* **Børre**: mpage & UTF-8
* **Sjur**: Post a description on how to patch XXE for Alt key support
* **Børre**: contact Anne-Britt today, and send the letter.
* **Børre and Trond**: update emacs and xml-mode, check automatic version-stamp
  in cvs $id$?
* **Sjur**: Send e-mail to Trond regarding binary files on the news group
* **Børre**: wiki support in forrest
* **Trond**: invite Lars N
* **Børre + Trond**: set up computers, check forrest in cochise
* **Børre**: divvun.no
* **Tomi/Børre**: do some work for Sjur on the termdb

# 1. Opening, agenda review
Opened 9.32, agenda accepted.

# 2. Reviewing the task list from a week ago (see below)
* **Børre**: suggest port numbers in the documentations:
    in the documentation now (under infra/forrest), will set up
    a separate main tab How-To
* Continue .profile discussion in news, conclusion this week
    we move from .profile to .bash_profile, docu to be updated
* **Børre**: mpage & UTF-8
    nothing happened last week
    - file a bug in Bugzilla, with the solution postponed to Tiger (OS 10.4)
* **Sjur**: Post a description on how to patch XXE for Alt key support
    posted a description in news, ok
* **Børre**: contact Anne-Britt today, and send the letter.
    Berit Karen has asked Børre to check the address list, letter
    was sent last week
* **Børre and Trond**: update emacs and xml-mode, check automatic version-stamp
  in cvs $id$?
    it seems to work for Sjur, more info needed
* **Sjur**: Send e-mail to Trond regarding binary files on the news group
    e-mail sent, Trond forwarded it, but the issue is still open.
    Trond will follow up the issue.
* **Børre**: wiki support in forrest
    done, except the UTF-8 problem
* **Trond**: invite Lars N
    Trond has sent e-mail with invitation, Lars has answered and will participate.
* **Børre + Trond**: set up computers, check forrest in cochise
    issue is still open, Trond has problems from home and other locations
* **Børre**: divvun.no
    IT staff were in Jokkmokk last week, nothing has happened
* **Tomi/Børre**: do some work for Sjur on the termdb
    Tomi was home with fever last week, Børre has looked at it

# 3. Documentation:
* Are we ready to remove the old HTML docs?
    -   Not until forrest works on cochise, no.
    -   Marit is fine with emacs in cochise, Børre will add info about XML
     mode in emacs to the docs, and also install in cochise
* is the Wiki format for meeting memos ok?
  That is, can it be used during the meeting? Yes.

# 4. Corpus gathering
The letter is sent.

**Thomas:** Mikael Svonni has promised to give us his lexicon/dictionary. Asbjörg Skåden
- Skániid girjie - has promised us her texts. And we will receive texts from
the Swedish gov, Ministry of Agriculture: North, Lule and South Sámi.

Thomas and Trond have discussed a letter to the Swedish ministry of agriculture,
regarding what format we preferred to receive text in. See next agenda topic.

# 5. Corpus infrastructure
Good discussions both offline and online. So far we have suggestions for:
* dir/file structure
* some of the meta information
* processing of incoming texts
    -    For .doc input: antiword via DocBook to xml is a strong candidate
    -    For .pdf we have no good solution yet
    -    For .html input: Not looked at yet, but html > xml should be easy.
    -    For .txt: Here we are interested in using Lars Nygård's txt structure guesser.
    -    The encoding issue: We have identified between 5 and 10 different formats,
      and need more work on the conversion scripts (Børre has started working on
      such scripts for antiword).
    -    Other formats: we don't know which yet
* thus, preferred formats are so far (in descending order): .doc, *.html, *.txt, *.pdf
* target format (suggestions in newsgroup, this discussion is still open)

# 6. Linguistics
Paradigms are looking better and better, more like what they should be.
Adjectives improving.

String categories still to cover:
* html addresses, number formats, number-letter combinations "*CG2" as opposed
  to "SGML" "CG" (all uppercase is now covered for max 5 char strings, thus
  "SGML", but not "sgml")
* These strings can be covered by regular expressions in lexc number generator,
  acronym generator.
* For HTML addresses, something like: ``` http://[a-z]+.[a-z0-9]+.{com,org,etc.} ```
* Trond files bug reports.

# 7. Language technology
Compilation problems on cochise:
*    lexicon compiles fine on the Mac, but not in cochise
*    Trond has written a letter to Ken and Lauri (the authors of the Xerox tools),
     and will file it as an internal bug report as well.

# 8. Term db
Technical deadline: Friday this week.
iTet is still «dead» (the contact person is not responding).

# 9. Other issues:
Pargas seminar:
*   who is going?
    -      Sjur and Børre go, one more (Tomi or Thomas)
*  topics of the seminar:
    -      User, developer and normative body perspective.

# 10. Summary, task lists

* **Sjur, Børre, Tomi**: terminology database
* **Børre**: will set up a separate main tab How-To
* **All**: we move from .profile to .bash_profile, **Børre**: docu to be updated
* **Børre**: mpage & UTF-8 - file a bug in Bugzilla, with the solution postponed
    to Tiger (OS 10.4)
* **Børre**:
    -  update emacs and xml-mode: Børre has a solution, will document
    -  check automatic version-stamp in cvs $id$? As above.
* **Trond**: will follow up the issue with binary postings in news
* **Børre**: wiki support in forrest works, will follow up on the UTF-8 problem
* **Børre + Trond**: set up computers, check forrest in cochise
    issue is still open, Trond has problems from home and other locations
* **Børre**: divvun.no -
    to be continued now that the IT staff is back from Jokkmokk

# 11. Closing

Closed at 10.57
