#  Meeting setup

* Time: 10.00 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are:-)
* Tools: Phone, iChat, SubEthaEdit

1. Opening
1. Last week/since last meeting - short summary from each of us
1. Linguistic priorities ahead - discussion
1. Corpus work:
##	collecting
##	infrastructure
1. Terminological db
1. Other issues
1. Closing

# 1. Opening

Meeting opened at 10.43 due to technical problems with SEE and
  the telephones at Tromsø. 

# 2. Last week/since last meeting

Short summary from each of us:
* **Maaren**:
    - hasn't had time, it's hard to prioritize among other tasks
    - has considered going to Tromsø for a week
* **Thomas**: 
    - Has had problems with CVS, could be network problem.
    - Studied commandline UNIX. 
    - Looked at Bugzilla. Too short error messages.
    - talked to Lantmäteriverket, they have started to code place
   names for language, thus making it possible to extract all and
   only the Sámi names. Work finished the coming summer.
* **Børre**:
    - worked on the documentation system (Forrest)
    - ready to run now
    - HTML docs still available. To be evaluated next week
   (whether we can move the old docs to the attic)

# 3. Linguistic priorities ahead

**Discussion**:	We need lots of lexicalisation, but we also need systematic
	testing, checking and development of different parts of the
	linguistic models. On my (incomplete) list I have:

*	 inflection for all POSes (under-/overgeneration)
*	 noun compounding (overgeneration wrt case used for comps -
	  assumption: compounding case does NOT follow from inflectional
	  class; if true, what implications does it have?)

We need a systematic testing plan. To be discussed further in the
  newsgroup. Thomas to be responsible for the discussions.

# 4. Corpus work:

* collecting
    - Børre is responsible
    - telephone contact first to people already informed
	     about the project
    - contact Sámi municipalities, the parliaments, author
	     organisations, NSI, Sámi Allaskuvla, Nasjonalbiblioteket i Norge.
    - use Per Edvard Klemetsen (Sjur to clear with Anne Britt first)
    - NSI - what do they have? Min Áigi, Á&scaron;&scaron;u, reports, MA theses
* infrastructure
    - corpus repository and structure
    - internal XML format
    - conversion to internal format, incl. lang id and text struct. markup
    - conversion from int. format to input to preproc.

# 5. Terminological db

* Committed to cvs
* Tomi has implemented Sámi sorting

# 6. Other issues

* CVS commit to mail a group of selected people (all?)
    -  Trond to check it out(!)
* how to edit the new docs in XML
    -  status check next meeting
* new discussion group, new participants:
    -  Trond to set up new group
    -  Sjur to invite when the group is running
* Lule Sámi:
    -  Thomas to contact Anders Kintel, to ask for entry words +
    infl codes (at best the whole dict.)
* new project members (Trond's project): Ilona - what should she do?

# 7. Closing

Closed at 12.47
