!!! Meeting setup

* Date: 21.02.2005
* Time: 10.00 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are:-)
* Tools: Phone, iChat, SubEthaEdit

!!! Agenda

#  Opening, agenda review
#  Reviewing the task list from a week ago
#  Documentation - still issues open?
#  Corpus gathering
#  Corpus infrastructure
#  Linguistics
#  Term db
#  Other issues
#  Summary, task lists
#  Closing

!!! Last week's task list

__TODO:__

* __Sjur + Børre:__ set up divvun.no
* __Tomi:__ Documentation system: Set up everybody (Tomi helps Marit set up
  forrest and XXE)
* __Trond:__ Erling Paulsen cont.
* __Tomi, Trond:__ Continue 7bit > utf-8 issue in the documentation.
* __Sjur:__ Resend e-mail about newsgroup problem
* Corpus DTD: Contact Lars Nygård. Start discussing concrete examples, directory
  structure.
* __Børre:__ Have a look at forrest port crash in cochise
* __Børre, Sjur:__ .profile issue: Investigate more, discuss on the newsgroup
* __Maaren:__ translate corpus letter
* __Sjur, Børre:__ set up a suitable format for the meeting memos for easy
  publishing in Forrest (cont.)
* __Børre:__ mpage or equiv.
* __Sjur + Tomi:__ fix Maaren's computer problems

!!!1. Opening, agenda review

* Opened at 10
* Agenda accepted as is

!!!2. Reviewing the task list from a week ago

* __Børre__ contacts IT-staff about divvun.no
* __Børre and Trond:__ Set up Marit and guest computer with forrest
* Newsgroup issue solved, with the help from Erling Paulsen. Thomas and Maren
  are able to read the newsgroup
* __Tomi, Trond:__ Corrected some, more to do
* Corpus DTD: __Tomi and Trond__ had a meeting with Lars. __Tomi, Trond and Børre__
  continue the work.
* cochise: __Sjur__ has added that issue (potential port crash in Forrest, and how
  to run Forrest on a different port) to the docu.
* Meeting memos: still utf-8 issues. Bug filed on forrest, hopefully resolved
  in a reasonable time. Meeting memos are available in cvs at {{{gt/doc/admin/weekly}}}
* __Børre:__ mpage or equiv. Mac OS X has built-in support, but not as pretty as mpage.
* __Thomas and Maren__ have __working__ computers

!!!3. Documentation - still issues open?
* Meeting memo support
* Some computers has to be set up (Marit and guest computer in Romsa)
* Check if cochise and forrest are working.
* XXE has a patch for support for extended chars available through the option-key.
    
!!!4. Corpus gathering
* letter is translated, Børre to contact Anne Britt
* how should the texts be delivered: (e-mail, physically go to the places ...)

!!!5. Corpus infrastructure
* to be cont. in the news group
* Add Lars Nygård to the news group?
* Strictly focused threads (conversion, file structure, etc.)

!!!6. Linguistics
* Good meeting in Romsa. We are progressing nicely, several bugs regarding 
  adjectives are solved, new ones are filed. The discussion is much more
  focused on the actual problems (file structure and not strictly linguistics),
  for example in Bugzilla Bug 50 has been narrowed down and improved in comparision 
  with Bug 39.
* Maaren has again no time (surprise, surprise) (going to Jåhkåmåhkke this week)...
  - I can work at night?

!!!7. Term db
* Tomi has a look at perl issues. Conversion from old to new format.
* Børre takes a look at the documentation. Multilingual issue.

!!!8. Other issues
*  Quality assurance on documentation. 
**   We need reviewers to read and comment 
     the documentation.
**   Add author and version information in each document
*  pictures in the newsgroup?
**   yes, Tomi to ask for binary post support in Unison
**   Trond to bug Erling Paulsen using e-mail from Sjur
*  status report for dis. proj.
**   "Samisk språkteknologi har laga eit program som kjenner att ca. 95 %
     av orda i løpande tekst, som for desse orda kan gje ordklasse og i dei
     aller fleste tilfella korrekt grammatisk analyse." The system contains 
     1167 rules :-), which is about 1/3 of what is needed.
        

!!!9. Summary, task lists
* Børre: suggest port numbers in the documentations
* Continue .profile discussion in news, conclusion this week
* Børre: mpage & UTF-8
* Sjur: Post a description on how to patch XXE for Alt key support
* Børre: contact Anne-Britt today, and send the letter.
* Børre and Trond: update emacs and xml-mode, check automatic version-stamp 
  in cvs $id$?
* Sjur: Send e-mail to Trond regarding binary files on the news group
* Børre: wiki support in forrest
* Trond: invite Lars N 
* Børre + Trond: set up computers, check forrest in cochise
* Børre: divvun.no
* Tomi/Børre: do some work for Sjur on the termdb

!!!10. Closing
Closed at 11:30
