# Meeting setup

* Date: 11.07.2005
* Time: 10.00 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are :-)
* Tools: Phone, iChat, SubEthaEdit

#  Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from a week ago
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. risten.no
1. Other issues
    1. News on Univ. proj. positions
    1. UNESCO project info
    1. Xerox contract
    1. CVS Mailing
    1. Helsinki gathering
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 10.00. Agenda accepted with some additions under "Other"

Present: Sjur, Trond, Tomi

Absent: Børre, Maaren, Thomas

Main secretary: Tomi

# 2. Reviewing the task list from the last meeting

##  Maaren
* The missing list, both the overall missing list from our xml corpus, and a file-for-file
  review, in order to get different terminology
* Go through the missing list from risten.no
    - the added words are not checked in - Sjur will call her and ask if she can do it before
   she leaves Guovdageaidnu
* send new letter to SGL about Lule Sámi possessives

##  Sjur
* Ask Anne-Britt to update the contract with the University (we are getting 3, not 2,
  persons there from the fall)
    - not done, Anne Britt on vacatino
* risten.no bugs and fixes
    - corrected several, added new ones to Bugzillla (present count: 47/20)
* write the LIST option to our test tools, as requested in the discussion group
    - not done - the task is transfered to Tomi, since nothing has happened in a *long* time:-)
* complete the action summary after our half-year evaluation
    - not done
* contact Kimmo Koskenniemi about kwic-snt and UTF-8 bug
    - not done
* follow up on:
    - voice group-chat not working to Sámediggi
    - Maaren has problems with SubEthaEdit (can't connect)
        - no response so far on my e-mail to the IT staff
* add i18n bug to Forrest issue tracker
    - not done, waiting for Børre
* add i18n menu as feature request to Forrest issue tracker
    - not done
* To the board: write proposal for permanent maintenance organisation
    - not done yet
* To the board: write draft specification for the outsourced tasks
    - not done yet
* To the board: write agenda, question: should the memos be public?
    - not done yet

##  Thomas
* bug proofreader for proofreading of the last QA on smj translations
    - has received the last document, and has added it to CVS
* write new letter to SGL about Lule Sámi possessives
    - done
* work with Lule Sami substantives
    - done some

##  On vacation last week

### Børre
* On vacation, issues from last week repeated at the end of the memo

###  Tomi
* Common Makefile for all the languages
* catxml default language issue
* three-part compounding
* decapitalisation of proper nouns when (if?) compounded, and when derived
  (the oslolaš issue)
* cvs update script for divvun documentation
    - done, script is in CVS (script/divvun2web), crontab missing
* corpus infrastructure: dtd location (both public and internal)
    - post a suggestion on file name conventions for dtds, as well as for the
   public location

### Trond
* Work on the bug list (Lule Sámi).
    - done 4 bugs, 5 still open
* Work on compounds (both regular and three-part, with Tomi)
    - three-part not done, regular two-part is fixed, proper-noun
   / down-casing compounds (oslolaš) not done
* Work on the corpus interface (with Lars)
    - done, Tomi made a script that made it possible to send input to a parallel
   corpus tool that Lars is working on
* Corpus infrastructure: dtd location
    - see above (under Tomi's summary)
* Get the new version of the New Testament
    - tried, but didn't get in touch with the correct person
* Get back to Xerox on the commercial license.
    - done
    - Sjur followed-up after Trond went on vacation, to get the tools as fast
   as possible
* Check Hans-Ragnar's names.
    - not done
* Give Thomas a telephone, and a crash-course in setting up phone meetings
    - done

# 3. Corpus gathering

See notes above for the New Testamente (under Trond)

# 4. Corpus infrastructure

Directory names not optimal. Presently we have:

```
sme/orig/
   int/
   gt/
```

So far so good. But internal in each of these, the names and categorization
are not optimal.

catxml: updated to include xml tags in the output, if so specified. To be able
to keep (or restore) the xml tags after linguistic analysis.

# 5. Linguistics

## sme

See above (compounds).

## smj

See above (bugs).

# 6. risten.no

Sjur will continue to use some time on the following issues:

* more bug fixing
* a couple of critical features still needs to be added

# 7. Other issues

##  News on University project positions

* Marit's position is now publicly announced

##  UNESCO project info

* Trond sent an e-mail to Sjur about a UNESCO project listing page for
  projects supporting endangered languages, with an emphasis of "example
  to follow" cases. Should we add our projects
  there? Yes, Sjur for Divvun, and Trond for Giellatekno.

##  CVS Mailing

Does not seem to be working for/reaching all of us. Sjur will follow up
with Steinar Trædal-Henden.

##  Helsinki gathering

###  Dates

Thomas did not want to go earlier. We extend the meeting with a technical day
on Monday, and all of us on Tuesday. Thomas can then travel on Monday, as originally
planned.

###  Demo

We still need confirmation on the Xerox tools (whether they will be available in time),
and whether we will get a slot/table for the demo. Sjur will keep all informed.

# 8. Summary, task list

##  Sjur
* Ask Anne-Britt to update the contract with the University (we are getting 3, not 2,
  persons there from the fall)
* risten.no bugs and fixes
* complete the action summary after our half-year evaluation
* contact Kimmo Koskenniemi about kwic-snt and UTF-8 bug
* follow up on:
    - voice group-chat not working to Sámediggi
    - Maaren has problems with SubEthaEdit (can't connect)
* add i18n bug to Forrest issue tracker
* add i18n menu as feature request to Forrest issue tracker
* To the board:
    - write proposal for permanent maintenance organisation
    - write draft specification for the outsourced tasks
    - write agenda, question: should the memos be public?
    - Deadline for the board tasks: 3 weeks ahead of meeting (date not decided, but
  in September)
* Follow up on CVS mailing with Steinar T-H (IT/UiT)
* add Divvun to the UNESCO Hall-of-Fame list
* Get back to Xerox on the commercial license.
* Check with Maaren whether she has checked in her additions - if not, she should
  (or send them via e-mail to somebody that can do it for her now)

##  Tomi
* Common Makefile for all the languages
* catxml default language issue
* three-part compounding
* decapitalisation of proper nouns when (if?) compounded, and when derived
  (the oslolaš issue)
* corpus infrastructure: dtd location (both public and internal)
* corpus infrastructure: file and dir organisation
* write the LIST option to our test tools, as requested in the discussion group

##  Trond
* Work on the bug list (Lule Sámi).
* Work on compounds (three-part + oslolaš, with Tomi)
* Work on the corpus interface (with Lars)
* Corpus infrastructure: dtd location
* Get the new version of the New Testament
* Check Hans-Ragnars names.
* add Divvun to the UNESCO Hall-of-Fame list

##  On vacation

Tasks are transferred to the following weeks until they return from vacation, to
keep the tasks alive and updated till after vacation. New tasks may be added:-)

###  Børre
* Add crontab specification for the cvs update/export script Tomi made
* Correct the war file/jspwiki issue
* Continue http://giellatekno.uit.no conversion to forrest ...
* Contact Svenska bibelsällskapet
* Add issue to forrest issue tracker about utf-8 ihtml documents.
    - Check for existing bug reports, it might already be in there
* Continue forrest i18n research
    - Sometimes abides the =locale=se/smj/fi in the url (the document gets
   correctly selected). The menus and tabs are translated to the language
   that the browser asks for.
* add RSS newsfeed support (check with Sjur/risten.no)
* discuss with Anders Kintel about whether we could get the Sámi-Norwegian dictionary
  ahead of acceptance

###  Maaren
* The missing list, both the overall missing list from our xml corpus, and a file-for-file
  review, in order to get different terminology
* Go through the missing list from risten.no
* send new letter to SGL about Lule Sámi possessives

###  Thomas
* write new letter to SGL about Lule Sámi possessives
* work with Lule Sami substantives

# 9. Next meeting, closing

18.07.2005 10:00

Closed at 12:40
