#  Meeting setup

* Date: 13.1.2005
* Time: 15.00 Norw. time
* Participants: BG, MP, SNM, TO, TP, TT

# Topics:
1. Opening, discussing and accepting the topics
1. UTF-8 conversion
1. Documentation system
1. Lexicon, linguistics
1. Rescheduled project meetings
    1.    suggestion: every Monday 10 AM Norw. time
1. New organisation
    1.    reality from May 1st
1. "Personalseminar" (whole of Samediggi):
    1.    28.2., 12.00 - 2.3., 12.00
    1.    the whole project group should be there

Starting 15.03

# 1 - Opening, discussing and accepting the topics

Accepted as is.

# 2 - UTF-8 conversion

* cochise is ready
* writing instr. now on how to convert to newsgroup
* the conversion scripts for in* and output to our web analyser
  was modified on the UTF-8 branch (earlier digraphs was in the
  source and UTF-8 input had to be converted, now it is the other
  way around)
* we are ready to start using UTF-8 (i.e. merge the UTF-8 branch
  with the HEAD)
* vislcg works fine

DEADLINE:
* conversion to UTF-8 in HEAD is done Friday 14.1.2005, barring
  that it is OK for Marit. Check-in deadline is thursday 17.00.

# 3 - Documentation system

* using Forrest (a project documentation system)
* converting the HTML files to XML (Forrest 1.3 DTD)
* reorganising the old doc files into a set of folders,
  to reduce the crowdedness; hopefully the folders define
  clear categories
* trying to set up the menus and tabs for the site

DEADLINE:
* Monday 24.1. documentation up and running

# 4 - Lexicon, linguistics

* Maaren is working all Mondays and Tuesdays on this project
* adding words
* straightened up the adjectival lexicon
* next week: adverbs
* have identified other linguistic problems:
    - what is a correct Sámi form or generalisation?
    - fixing two-level rules (diphtong simplification, others),
      and check against data
    - Maaren and Thomas will make linguistic generalisation; these
      generalisations will be turned into rules (Maaren, Thomas,
      Trond)
- getting constant and helpful feedback from Marit

# 5 - Rescheduled project meetings
* suggestion: every Monday 10 AM Norw. time
* OK/better for all

DECISION: accepted.

# 6 - New organisation

* reality from May 1st

# 7 - "Personalseminar" (whole of Samediggi):

* 28.2., 12.00 - 2.3., 12.00
* the whole project group should be there
* in Alta

# 8 - Additional topics:

* Trond: Skuvlalinux
    - Pekka has said that the lexicon files can be open-sourced as
  far as he is concerned.
    - we should be involved with the discussion on the Skuvlalinux list
* Sjur: Pargas seminar
    - Proofing tools seminar
    - Pargas, Finland, 21-22 of April
    - Sjur to forward the e-mail
* Tomi: Sámi place names in Finland
    - the contact person did not want to give a copy
    - Ilmari Mattus is collecting Inari Sámi place names

# Summary
* UTF-8 conversion will be done this Friday
* Document. system ready 24.1
* Project meetings now on Monday, next meeting 24.1
* All project members to participate in Alta seminar

Ending 16.10
