# Meeting setup

* Date: 14.02.2005
* Time: 10.00 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are:-)
* Tools: Phone, iChat, SubEthaEdit

#  Agenda

1.  Opening, agenda review
1.  Reviewing the task list from a week ago (see below)
1.  Documentation - still issues open?
1.  Corpus gathering
1.  Corpus infrastructure
1.  Linguistics
1.  Term db
1.  Other issues:
    1.    no Personell Seminar in Feb/March: delayed
    1.    UTF-8 issues
1.  Summary, task lists
1.  Closing

# Last week's task list

**TODO:**
*  **Sjur + Børre:** set up divvun.no
*  **All:** use only .profile (no .bashrc!) -> into the documentation
*  **Børre, Trond, all:** continue to update the documentation of setting
      up machines and working environment
*  **Tomi, Trond:** to clean the documentation from references to the old 7/8-bit
      system, and convert them to proper documentation for the present UTF-8
*  **Tomi, Børre, Trond:** discuss the use of .profile and .bashrc in cochise
*  **Tomi, Børre, Trond:** sorting in Emacs, SubEthaEdit and command line
*  **Trond** to call Erling Paulsen (news group problem)
*  **Børre** to call Anne Britt about corpus letter
*  **Tomi** to lead the discussion on corpus infrastructure, DTDs vs Schemas, etc
*  **Sjur, Trond, Tomi, Marit:** Orthographic status (misspelled) tags
      in the disamb output?
*  **Sjur, Børre:** set up a suitable format for the meeting memos for easy
      publishing in Forrest.

# 0. Opening, agenda review
10.05

# 1. Reviewing the task list from a week ago
*  divvun.no: Sjur hasn´t heard anything from IT-staff at the Sámi parliament.
*  .profile issue: Investigate more, discuss on the newsgroup
*  Maaren will translate the letter
*  DTD: Tomi has read standards
*  Memo publishing: Sjur has tested a wiki plugin. Works ok, except that it 
      doesn´t understand utf-8.

# 2. Documentation

*  Tomi: help Marit + Trond
*  Cochise setup

# 3. Corpus gathering

*  Maaren is working on the translations
*  still missing Finnish addresses

# 4. Corpus infrastructure

Covered elsewhere

# 5. Linguistics

*  Maaren & Thomas in Tromsø this week
*  Thomas has continued on Trond's list, found and filed more bugs
*  Ilona has worked on the list of 22 thousand missing words.

# 6. Term db

*  Two steps forward and one step back: Able to edit, but now struggling 
      with utf-8

# 7. Other issues:

*  no Personell Seminar in Feb/March: delayed
*  UTF-8 issues:
    -    mpage is not utf-8 ready, but there is a bug fix. Børre will have a
      look: ```cat -n file | mpage > file.ps``` - but Børre has an alternative.
    -    kwic-snt is still not fixed (utf-8 problem)
*  Maaren's computer problems

# 8. Summary, task lists

**TODO:**
*  **Sjur + Børre:** set up divvun.no
*  **Tomi:** Documentation system: Set up everybody (Tomi helps Marit set up 
      forrest and XXE)
*  **Trond:** Erling Paulsen cont.
*  **Tomi, Trond:** Continue 7bit > utf-8 issue in the documentation.
*  **Sjur:** Resend e-mail about newsgroup problem
*  Corpus DTD: Contact Lars Nygård. Start discussing concrete examples, directory 
      structure.
*  **Børre:** Have a look at forrest port crash in cochise
*  **Børre, Sjur:** .profile issue: Investigate more, discuss on the newsgroup
*  **Maaren:** translate corpus letter
*  **Sjur, Børre:** set up a suitable format for the meeting memos for easy
      publishing in Forrest (cont.)
*  **Børre:** mpage or equiv.
*  **Sjur + Tomi:** fix Maaren's computer problems

# 9. Closing

Meeting closed at 11:00 AM
