# Meeting setup

* Date: 01.08.2005
* Time: 10.00 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are :-)
* Tools: Phone, iChat, SubEthaEdit

#  Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from a week ago
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Speller infrastructure
1. Other issues
    1. CVS Mailing
    1. Helsinki gathering
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 10:27.

Present: Tomi, Trond

Absent: Maaren, Sjur, Thomas, Børre

Main secretary: Tomi

# 2. Reviewing the task list from the last meeting

##  Tomi
* Common Makefile for all the languages
    - And for speller infrastructure
        - Done
* three-part compounding
    - Not done
* decapitalisation of proper nouns when (if?) compounded, and when derived
  (the oslolaš issue)
    - Not done
* corpus infrastructure: dtd location (both public and internal)
    - Not done
* corpus infrastructure: file and dir organisation
    - Not done
* Aspell: A simple wordlist based speller
    - progressing...
    - wordlist:
* Follow up on CVS mailing:
    - check that all received forwarded mail
    - set up Thomas and Maaren when they're back from vacation
        - They are still on vacation

##  On vacation last week

###  Trond
* Work on the bug list (Lule Sámi).
    - Done some work
* Work on compounds (three-part + oslolaš, with Tomi)
    - Added text on compounding to documentation (lang/sme/docu-sme-flag-diacritics.xml)
* Work on the corpus interface (with Lars)
    - Nothing
* Corpus infrastructure: dtd location
    - Nothing
* Get the new version of the New Testament
    - Nothing
* Check Hans-Ragnars names.
    - Nothing
* add Divvun to the UNESCO Hall-of-Fame list
    - Sjur did this

###  Maaren
* On vacation, issues from last week repeated at the end of the memo

###  Thomas
* On vacation, issues from last week repeated at the end of the memo

###  Sjur
* On vacation, issues from last week repeated at the end of the memo

###  Børre
* On vacation, issues from last week repeated at the end of the memo

# 3. Documentation - divvun.no

# 4. Corpus gathering

# 5. Corpus infrastructure

Do documentation.

# 6. Speller infrastructure

##  aSpell

Is progressing.

# 7. Summary, task list

##  Tomi
* three-part compounding
* decapitalisation of proper nouns when (if?) compounded, and when derived
  (the oslolaš issue)
* corpus infrastructure: dtd location (both public and internal)
* corpus infrastructure: file and dir organisation
* Aspell: A simple wordlist based speller
* Follow up on CVS mailing:
    - check that all received forwarded mail
    - set up Thomas and Maaren when they're back from vacation

##  On vacation

Tasks are transferred to the following weeks until they return from vacation, to
keep the tasks alive and updated. New tasks may be added:-)

###  Børre
* Add crontab specification for the cvs update/export script Tomi made
* reopen the jspwiki + UTF-8 issue
* Contact Svenska bibelsällskapet
* Add issue to forrest issue tracker about utf-8 ihtml documents.
    - Check for existing bug reports, it might already be in there
* Continue forrest i18n research
    - Sometimes abides the =locale=se/smj/fi in the url (the document gets
   correctly selected). The menus and tabs are translated to the language
   that the browser asks for.
* discuss with Anders Kintel about whether we could get the Sámi-Norwegian dictionary
  ahead of acceptance
* add the Oslo contract to cvs, and begin writing a contract draft
* Follow up on CVS mailing:
    - check that all received forwarded mail
    - set up Thomas and Maaren when they're back from vacation

###  Maaren
* The missing list, both the overall missing list from our xml corpus, and a file-for-file
  review, in order to get different terminology
* Go through the missing list from risten.no
* send new letter to SGL about Lule Sámi possessives

###  Sjur
* risten.no bugs and fixes
* complete the action summary after our half-year evaluation
* contact Kimmo Koskenniemi about kwic-snt and UTF-8 bug
    - postponed till the Helsinki meeting
* follow up on:
    - voice group-chat not working to Sámediggi
    - Maaren has problems with SubEthaEdit (can't connect)
* To the board:
    - write proposal for permanent maintenance organisation
    - write draft specification for the outsourced tasks
    - write half-yearly project report with progress and bugdet status
    - write agenda
    - Deadline for the board tasks: 3 weeks ahead of meeting (date not decided, but
  in September)
* add Divvun to the UNESCO Hall-of-Fame list
* Get the tools from Xerox

###  Thomas
* write new letter to SGL about Lule Sámi possessives
* work with Lule Sami substantives

###  Trond
* Work on the bug list (Lule Sámi).
* Work on compounds (three-part + oslolaš, with Tomi)
* Work on the corpus interface (with Lars)
* Corpus infrastructure: dtd location
* Get the new version of the New Testament
* Check Hans-Ragnars names.

# 8. Next meeting, closing

08.08.2005 10:00

Closed at 11:15
