# Meeting setup

* Date: 18.07.2005
* Time: 10.00 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are :-)
* Tools: Skype, iChat, SubEthaEdit

#  Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from a week ago
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Speller infrastructure
1. Other issues
    1. CVS Mailing
    1. Helsinki gathering
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 10:45.

Present: Tomi, Børre, Trond

Absent: Maaren, Sjur, Thomas

Main secretary: Tomi

# 2. Reviewing the task list from the last meeting

##  Børre
* Add crontab specification for the cvs update/export script Tomi made
    - We don't have write access to files in the divvun-no file area, so we
  will have to wait for Thor-Øivind.
* Correct the war file/jspwiki issue
    - Done
* reopen the jspwiki + UTF-8 issue
    - Nothing done
* Continue http://giellatekno.uit.no conversion to forrest ...
    - Most of the old site is ported to forrest, links to xerox are not there.
* Contact Svenska bibelsällskapet
    - Nothing done
* Add issue to forrest issue tracker about utf-8 ihtml documents.
    - Check for existing bug reports, it might already be in there
    - Nothing done
* Continue forrest i18n research
    - Sometimes abides the =locale=se/smj/fi in the url (the document gets
   correctly selected). The menus and tabs are translated to the language
   that the browser asks for.
* add RSS newsfeed support (done by Sjur, but requires new war file)
    - Done on the local copy, but divvun.no crashes everytime the war file is
  renewed, has to wait for Thor-Øivind to resolve that issue, too.
* discuss with Anders Kintel about whether we could get the Sámi-Norwegian dictionary
  ahead of acceptance
    - Nothing done
* add the Oslo contract to cvs, and begin writing a contract draft
    - Nothing done

##  Sjur
* risten.no bugs and fixes
    - continued - main bug worked on was concurrent editing (see
   [bug # 108](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=108))
* complete the action summary after our half-year evaluation
    - Not done.
* contact Kimmo Koskenniemi about kwic-snt and UTF-8 bug
    - postponed till the Helsinki meeting
* follow up on:
    - voice group-chat not working to Sámediggi
    - Maaren has problems with SubEthaEdit (can't connect)
        - both done: spoke to Kristian Solheim (IT) about opening ports to Maaren's
    (and Børre's) computers - he was going to work it out with the
    firewall maintenance guy (he is external to Sámediggi). This should also
    fix another problem in the same category: Apple Remote Desktop isn't
    working across the Sámediggi firewall (hasn't been a big problem in the
    past, but might be now as Maaren is sitting more alone). Kristian was
    going to return to me, but nothing has been heard. I have sent an e-mail
    reminder.
* add i18n bug to Forrest issue tracker
    - done (see [FOR-578](http://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FOR-578))
* add i18n menu as feature request to Forrest issue tracker
    - done (see [FOR-579](http://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FOR-579))
* also added a couple of other bugs/feature requests to the Forrest
  issue tracker:
    - i18n default/fallback language should be configurable via
   forrest.properties (see [FOR-580](http://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FOR-580))
    - xxe tool (Forrest support in XMLEditor) does not work out of user
   pref dir (see [FOR-581](http://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FOR-581))
* To the board:
    - write proposal for permanent maintenance organisation
        - Empty document frame created.
    - write draft specification for the outsourced tasks
        - The first sections are started on. Børre and Tomi: Please have a look and
    continue, if possible.
    - write half-yearly project report with progress and bugdet status
        - Not done.
    - write agenda
        - Not done.
    - Deadline for the board tasks: 3 weeks ahead of meeting (date not decided, but
  in September)
* Follow up on CVS mailing with IT/UiT
    - Done. Mail forwarding has been corrected to work for Sjur as well.
    - Still to be done:
        - check that forwarding is working for all (task transferred to Børre or
    Tomi, you decide:-)
        - add Maaren and Thomas to the samicvs mailing list when they return,
    as well as instruct them on how to filter their e-mail, so to not
    fill up their inboxes with cvs mail.
* add Divvun to the UNESCO Hall-of-Fame list
    - Not done.
* Get the tools from Xerox
    - Nothing heard from them - I have e-mailed and asked about the progress.
* Other tasks:
    - wrote monthly report for June (oops - 12 days late:-( )
    - installed updated version of [risten.no](http://www.risten.no/)

##  Tomi
* Common Makefile for all the languages
    - And for speller infrastructure
        - Problems are beginning to be solved out, progressing
* three-part compounding
    - Not done.
* decapitalisation of proper nouns when (if?) compounded, and when derived
  (the oslolaš issue)
    - Not done.
* corpus infrastructure: dtd location (both public and internal)
    - Not done.
* corpus infrastructure: file and dir organisation
    - Not done.
* Aspell: A simple wordlist based speller
    - Waiting for xerox tools
    - Looked at MS Office spellchecker API, IMO it should not be difficult to do this part
   ourselves, we need tools from MicroSoft
   ([http://support.microsoft.com/default.aspx?scid=KB;EN-US;Q262605&])

##  On vacation last week

###  Trond
* More or less on vacation, working each morning before the rest of the family wakes up
* Work on the bug list (Lule Sámi).
    - Most bugs fixed, still some troublesome ones, and more sme bugs coming in.
* Work on compounds (three-part + oslolaš, with Tomi)
    - Not done.
* Work on the corpus interface (with Lars)
    - Not done.
* Corpus infrastructure: dtd location
    - Not done.
* Get the new version of the New Testament
    - Not done.
* Check Hans-Ragnars names.
    - Not done.
* add Divvun to the UNESCO Hall-of-Fame list
    - Sjur did it :-)
* Did some work on linguistic documentation.

###  Maaren
* On vacation, issues from last week repeated at the end of the memo

###  Thomas
* On vacation, issues from last week repeated at the end of the memo

# 3. Documentation - divvun.no

Giellatekno has been ported to forrest, we'll have to look at external links.
The menu structure for the technical documentation has been changed.
Trond has written some documentation, but there are still holes to be filled.

# 4. Corpus gathering

Børre will work on a draft contract, based on the Finnish contracts.

# 5. Corpus infrastructure

Some changes to conversion script. The catalogue infrastructure must be reworked,
as discussed in the last meeting: In the gt/catalogue, we do not need year catalogues,
and not catalogues named after the collector, but rather (consistently named)
catalogues after text publisher and/or type.

# 6. Speller infrastructure

Tomi has started reading himself up on the issue. Making an alpha version for the
Helsinki fst meeting has high priority, this work should be continued, by Tomi, to
a certain extent in cooperation with Børre.

##  aSpell

Waiting for xerox tools.

##  Outsourcing

What needs to be outsourced?
Microsoft provides Common Speller API in address
[http://support.microsoft.com/default.aspx?scid=KB;EN-US;Q262605&]

InDesign?

# 7. Summary, task list

##  Børre
* Add crontab specification for the cvs update/export script Tomi made
* reopen the jspwiki + UTF-8 issue
* Contact Svenska bibelsällskapet
* Add issue to forrest issue tracker about utf-8 ihtml documents.
    - Check for existing bug reports, it might already be in there
* Continue forrest i18n research
    - Sometimes abides the =locale=se/smj/fi in the url (the document gets
   correctly selected). The menus and tabs are translated to the language
   that the browser asks for.
* discuss with Anders Kintel about whether we could get the Sámi-Norwegian dictionary
  ahead of acceptance
* add the Oslo contract to cvs, and begin writing a contract draft
* Follow up on CVS mailing:
    - check that all received forwarded mail
    - set up Thomas and Maaren when they're back from vacation

##  Tomi
* Common Makefile for all the languages
    - And for speller infrastructure
* three-part compounding
* decapitalisation of proper nouns when (if?) compounded, and when derived
  (the oslolaš issue)
* corpus infrastructure: dtd location (both public and internal)
* corpus infrastructure: file and dir organisation
* Aspell: A simple wordlist based speller
* Follow up on CVS mailing:
    - check that all received forwarded mail
    - set up Thomas and Maaren when they're back from vacation

##  On vacation

Tasks are transferred to the following weeks until they return from vacation, to
keep the tasks alive and updated. New tasks may be added:-)

###  Maaren
* The missing list, both the overall missing list from our xml corpus, and a
  file-for-file review, in order to get different terminology
* Go through the missing list from risten.no
* send new letter to SGL about Lule Sámi possessives

###  Sjur
* risten.no bugs and fixes
* complete the action summary after our half-year evaluation
* contact Kimmo Koskenniemi about kwic-snt and UTF-8 bug
    - postponed till the Helsinki meeting
* follow up on:
    - voice group-chat not working to Sámediggi
    - Maaren has problems with SubEthaEdit (can't connect)
* To the board:
    - write proposal for permanent maintenance organisation
    - write draft specification for the outsourced tasks
    - write half-yearly project report with progress and bugdet status
    - write agenda
    - Deadline for the board tasks: 3 weeks ahead of meeting (date not decided, but
  in September)
* add Divvun to the UNESCO Hall-of-Fame list
* Get the tools from Xerox

###  Thomas
* write new letter to SGL about Lule Sámi possessives
* work with Lule Sami substantives

###  Trond
* Work on the bug list (Lule Sámi).
* Work on compounds (three-part + oslolaš, with Tomi)
* Work on the corpus interface (with Lars)
* Corpus infrastructure: dtd location
* Get the new version of the New Testament
* Check Hans-Ragnars names.
* add Divvun to the UNESCO Hall-of-Fame list

# 8. Next meeting, closing

25.07.2005 10:00, if Tomi isn't alone.

Closed at 11:45
