# Meeting setup

* Date: 14.03.2005
* Time: 10.00 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are:-)
* Tools: Phone, iChat, SubEthaEdit

#  Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review, participants
1. Reviewing the task list from a week ago
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. Term db
1. Other issues
    1. Alta employee seminar
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# Task list since last meeting:
* **Tomi**: to check orig. doc. integrity in the OO file format
* **Tomi**: Move the corpus discussion from newsgroup to forrest
* **Thomas**: Ask for mice (Leif Åge, reception)
* **Thomas**: work with verbs
* **Børre**: correct image linking in termdb and divvun projects
    -  will look into it this week
* **All**: discuss our own corpus format in the newsgroup - to be continued.
* **Tomi and Børre**: identify the input encodings antiword can handle
    -  to continue to look into this: it is still possible that char conv.
    can be done within antiword.
* **Sjur, Børre**: terminology database
* **Børre**: divvun.no:
    -  Leif Åge has appearently started to work on this, Børre to follow up
* **Børre**: should make the How-To tab appear as intended:
    -  still to be done
* **Børre**: add automatic version-stamp: add $Author$ to some docs, replace
    e-mail with project e-mail address (Børre will ask Leif Åge).
* **Børre**: wiki - will follow up on the UTF-8 problem
    -  temporary workaround: use Latin 1-encoding for the memos
    -  Børre will continue to look into the chaperon tools (chaperon is used for
    converting Wiki to XML)
* **Trond**: forrest run in cochise:
    -  Awaiting latest report from Trond
* **Trond, Børre, all**: fix the links
    -  Børre will look more into it this week.

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 10.07. Agenda accepted.

Present: Maaren, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi

Away: Trond, Børre

# 2. Reviewing the task list from the last meeting

* **Tomi**: to check orig. doc. integrity in the OO file format
    -  the integrity is kept
    -  is the speed a problem? Trond think so
    -  we can use our own XML, but need to rework the perl tools, or find another solution
* **Tomi**: Move the corpus discussion from newsgroup to forrest
    -  not completed, stayed home with ill child and wife
* **Thomas**: Ask for mice (Leif Åge, reception)
    -  mice have arrived - finally!
* **Thomas**: work with verbs
    -  done
* **Børre**: correct image linking in termdb and divvun projects
    -  will look into it this week
    -  => postponed
* **All**: discuss our own corpus format in the newsgroup - to be continued.
    -  been down during easter
* **Tomi and Børre**: identify the input encodings antiword can handle
    -  to continue to look into this: it is still possible that char conv.
    can be done within antiword.
    -  Latin1 is working fine, Levi is problematic
    -  Børre know the details => postponed
* **Sjur, Børre**: terminology database
    -  done
* **Børre**: divvun.no:
    -  Leif Åge has appearently started to work on this, Børre to follow up
    -  is now working, redirected to the HumFak-server at UiTø
* **Børre**: should make the How-To tab appear as intended:
    -  still to be done
    -  => postponed
* **Børre**: add automatic version-stamp: add $Author$ to some docs, replace
    e-mail with project e-mail address (Børre will ask Leif Åge).
    -  => postponed
* **Børre**: wiki - will follow up on the UTF-8 problem
    -  temporary workaround: use Latin 1-encoding for the memos
    -  Børre will continue to look into the chaperon tools (chaperon is used for
    converting Wiki to XML)
    -  => postponed
* **Trond**: forrest run in cochise:
    -  Awaiting latest report from Trond
    -  => postponed
* **Trond, Børre, all**: fix the links
    -  Tomi has done some more corrections
    -  => postponed

# 3. Documentation - divvun.no

**Tomi** has added Lucene search facilities in his copy, found some broken links that
caused problems for Lucene and fixed them. Lucene requires a patch in our Forrest installation,
which Tomi will make available, either via subversion or as a patch he will bring to Alta.

Further discussion postponed due to Børre's absence.

# 4. Corpus gathering

**Maaren**: We've received an e-mail from Metsähallitus in Finland, and we will
receive material from them.

Further discussion postponed due to Børre's absence.

# 5. Corpus infrastructure

Prioritized discussion:
1.  XML format
1.  storage format/organisation
1.  conversion and processing tools

Using this priority, continue the discussion in news and elsewhere.

# 6. Linguistics

**Thomas** has finished the general verb walk-through, going through impersonal and modal
verbs. Discussion regarding modals to be continued in the newsgroup.

# 7. Term db

**Sjur** has been doing a lot, still some tasks, but close to a wrap-up and less activity
from Sjur on this job.

# 8. Other issues

## 8.1 Alta employee seminar

Everyone bring their computer. Don't know whether we will have some time, but at least we
have the possibility to do technical clean-ups or resolve technical problems if any.

# 9. Summary, task lists

TODO:
* **Tomi**: to check orig. doc. integrity in the OO file format
    -  discussion postponed till the XML format is settled/defined
* **Tomi**: Move the corpus discussion from newsgroup to forrest
* **Thomas**: continue work with verbs / modals
* **Børre**: correct image linking in termdb and divvun projects
    -  will look into it this week
* **All**: discuss our own corpus format in the newsgroup - to be continued.
    -  continue
* **Tomi and Børre**: identify the input encodings antiword can handle
    -  to continue to look into this: it is still possible that char conv.
    can be done within antiword.
* **Sjur, Børre**: terminology database
* **Børre**: divvun.no:
    -  to set up the documentation and integration with CVS
* **Børre**: should make the How-To tab appear as intended:
    -  still to be done
* **Børre**: add automatic version-stamp: add $Author$ to some docs, replace
    e-mail with project e-mail address (Børre will ask Leif Åge).
* **Børre**: wiki - will follow up on the UTF-8 problem
    -  temporary workaround: use Latin 1-encoding for the memos
    -  Børre will continue to look into the chaperon tools (chaperon is used for
    converting Wiki to XML)
* **Trond**: forrest run in cochise:
    -  Still awaiting latest report from Trond
* **Trond, Børre, all**: fix the links
    -  Børre will check if there are still more link problems

# 10. Next meeting, closing

Next meeting: 11.04.2005

Closed at 10.55
