# Meeting setup

* Date: 23.05.2005
* Time: 12.00 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are :-)
* Tools: Phone, iChat, SubEthaEdit

#  Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from a week ago
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. Term db
1. Other issues
    1. Sjur: brief report from Joensuu
    1. The gathering
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 12.20. Agenda accepted as is.

Present: Sjur, Thomas, Tomi, Trond, Børre

Main secretary: Børre

# 2. Reviewing the task list from the last meeting

* **Børre**:
    -  Contact Univ. of Oslo on the contract issue.
        - Got a contract from them
    -  Finish the divvun e-mail alias
        - Leif Åge said he would fix it, haven't got any feedback
    -  Contact people about Lule Sámí texts
        - Nothing done
    -  Contact skolelinux and Knut Hofland about webcrawler.
    -  Here is Knut's thoughts on the issue in 1999:
    [http://gandalf.aksis.uib.no/knut/mons/kh-avis.htm]
        - Nothing done
    -  Finish the setup of divvun.no
        - Haven't had contact with Thor Øivind Johansen, Børre will try to contact him in
    person today
    -  Look at how forrest handles i18n, try to get work done on that.
        - Done some brief work
    -  Set up programme and other details about the gathering in Guovdageaidnu
    25th-27th of May
        - Done
    -  Contact Roy Dragseth about cvs-commit mailing
        - Sent an e-mail, phoned him a few days later. He is away untill the 26th of May.
    -  Finish the setup of [http://giellatekno.uit.no/]
        - Done some work.

* **Tomi**:
    -  Template for manual xsl conversion script
        - Done, Sjur helped
    -  Script for processing the corpus for preprocessor
        - Done (catxml)
    -  Install "Tiger" (10.4), document all issues, together with steps to resolve
    them
        - Postponed to Kautokeino
    -  Look at the twolc part of how to handle shortening of the middle part in
    three part compounds. Discuss the data / linguistic side with the linguists.
        - Nothing done
    -  Look at decapitalisation of proper nouns when compounded or derived to a
    general noun
        - Nothing done

* **Sjur**:
    -  Meet with Kimmo:
        - Discuss text licensing, and get a copy of the Helsinki licensing model/text
    Got a copy
        - Bring up the kwic-snt issue with Kimmo, make it utf-8 compatible (now,
    each byte counts as one, instead of each character counting as one (what is
    needed is a counting mechanism that counts only bytes starting in 01 or 110,
    and ignoring bytes starting in 10.)
    Forgot that, kwic-snt issue still open.
    -  Still some work on the Termdb
    -  Write presentation for the Joensuu meeting
    -  Decide upon the public opening of divvun.no with Anne Britt
    -  Discuss with Thor Øivind Johansen about Forrest/divvun/Tomcat.
    Tel: +47 7764 6741
    -  Ask Leif Åge to check the opening/forwarding of ports number needed for
    iChat voice and video conferencing

* **Maaren**:
    -  continue with proper nouns, work on the Bugzilla bug list
    -  reserve rooms at Villmarkssenteret
    -  Translate divvun.no front page to Finnish

* **Thomas**:
    -  continue with verb valency
    about 3000 verbs left now
    -  Reply to Teemu Leskinen, thanking for the material but asking that we get a
    new version, now with the Finnish names coupled with the Sámi names, if at
    all possible.
    Teemu will send us a new version.

* **Trond**:
    -  Work with the bug list, the lexicon, disambiguation. Prepare Lule Sámi etc.
    for the meeting.
    Has worked on linguistic issues, but not on Lule Sámi. Have worked on bugs.

* **All**:
    -  Have a look at the bug list in Bugzilla (mainly Trond's bugs, but give
    me a hand, will you?)     [http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/]
    We are now down at 14 open bugs.
    -  Prepare the Guovdageaidnu meeting
    -  Order tickets to the Guovdageaidnu meeting

# 3. Documentation - divvun.no

Nothing has happened - no contact with Thor Øyvind yet.

# 4. Corpus gathering
Licenses received.
Received two books from the Old Testament, was promised a new version of the New
Testament.

# 5. Corpus infrastructure
Tomi has made templates for manual conversion scripts and ...

Sjur disc with LarsN and Trond about tagged corpus format in Joensuu

# 6. Linguistics

See above.

# 7. Term db

It was opened as an internal version for beta testing at the
Sámediggi on the 19th of May.

# 8. Other issues

## 8.1 Report from Jooensuu:

- Welcome to give a system demo on the Finite State workshop in Helsinki
- Tools for automatical creation of bilingual dictionarie4s on the basis
  of aligned parallel corpora.

## 8.2 This week + gathering

### 8.2.1 Gathering - Programme:

* Wednesday before lunch
    - Common issues:
        -  Evaluate first half year
        -  Discuss issues/improvements
        -  Bugzilla methodology

* Wednesday after lunch
    - Programmers' session
        - Upgrade to 10.4, fix things
        -  Bugzilla bugs?
    - Linguist session
        - Lule Sámi: Discussion on how to proceed, UTF-8 vs. Latin 1, make a task
    overview for the programmers
        - Linguistic issues in Northern Sámi
        -  Work procedures for linguistics
     The missing list, the names, the loan words
        -  Kárás1*joh*las1, case agreement within numerals, Vowel
     shortening of compounds with short 1st syllable (bivdo- pro bivdu-).
     The linguistic facts must be clearified.
        -  Bugzilla bugs

* Thursday before lunch
    - Common session
        - xml format for the lexicon
        - Lule Sámi common things

* Thursday after lunch
    - Linguists' session
        - Linguistic issues cont. from Wednesday.
    -  Programmers' session
        - Forrest i18n
        - Outsourcing: specification of the outsourced work
        - Make sure video and voice conferencing is working through the
    Sámediggi firewall

* Friday before lunch
    - Computational linguist session (Tomi, Sjur, Trond)
        - Discussing things that has come up during the week, relevant for twolc, lexc, xfst
    - Session for the rest
        - Ask Børre about everything you were afraid to ask about (TM)

* Friday after lunch
    -  Programmers
        - xml format for the lexicon, the more technical details

### 8.2.2 Practical things:

*  We will stay at Villmarkssenteret
    - Sjur: 23.-27.5.
    - Trond 23.-27.5.
    - Tomi  23.-27.5.
    - Børre: Monday - Friday (Private accomodation)
*  Schedule. Wednesday, thursday, friday, full days (Trond to leave
   after lunch on Friday) and Maren about 11.00.
*  The meeting room has been reserved.

# 9. Summary, task list

**TODO:**
* **Børre**:
    -  Contact Thor Øivind

* **Thomas**:
    -  Change reservations at Villmarksenteret

* **Trond**:
Disamb documentation with Børre.

* **All**:
    - The Guovdageaidnu gathering

# 10. Next meeting, closing

30.05.2005 10.00

Closed at 13.35
