# Meeting setup

* Date: 19.09.2005
* Time: 10.00 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are :-)
* Tools: iChat, SubEthaEdit

#  Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from two weeks ago
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. Speller infrastructure
1. Other issues
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 10:03.

Present: **Børre, Maaren, Saara, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi**

Absent: **Trond**

Main secretary: **Sjur**

Agenda accepted as is.

# 2. Reviewing the task list from the last meeting

##  Børre
* Finish crontab specification for the cvs update/export script **Tomi** made
    -  still working
* reopen the jspwiki + UTF-8 issue
    -  Done
* Add issue to forrest issue tracker about utf-8 ihtml documents.
    -  Done
* Contact Svenska bibelsällskapet
    -  Done, but haven't managed to get contact with **Olavi Korhonen** who has the
    latest translation
* discuss with **Anders Kintel** about possible cooperation
    -  Not done
* Follow up on CVS mailing:
    - set up **Maaren**
        - Will do it this week, as I am in Kautokeino
* Meet up with **Trond** about directory structure
    -  Not done
* Contact oahpahusossodat and the rest of the SD about texts
    -  Will do it this week
* Fixing the machine for the new coworker
    -  Done
* Document the corpus infrastructure
    -  Not done
* Read through the Helsinki contracts (new translations)
    -  Not done
* Reorganise the directory structure
    -  Not done
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
    -  Not done

##  Maaren
* The missing list, both the overall missing list from our xml corpus, and a
  file-for-file review, in order to get different terminology.
**shall do it next week
* shall get mainly through the missing list from risten.no this week
**working hard this week also
* Start working on grammatical issues with **Thomas** and **Trond**
    - not done
* Work on the name project with **Trond** and **Maaren**
**not done
* Start looking at normativity issues
    - not done it yet
* Work on the numerals project with **Trond**
    - not done it yet

##  Saara
* Look at the corpus infrastructure issue
    - Working on this
* Look at the corpus interface issue with **Lars**
    - Not done
* Convert texts from .doc to .xml, to get a grasp of our corpus format
    - Not done
* Have a look at the pdf-to-xml issue (known problem: Keep the Sámi
  letters sound and safe)
    - Testing with some tools, e.g. pdftohtml, pdftotext. The Sámi
   characters pose no problem. Instead, it seems to be difficult to
   preserve the layout of the document, headings, paragraphs, etc.

##  Sjur
* risten.no bugs and fixes
    - nothing done this week
* complete the action summary after our half-year evaluation
* follow up on:
    - voice group-chat not working across the Sámediggi firewall
        - Now awaiting cost evaluation from the IT guys (**Geir Kaaby** et al)
* To the board:
    - write draft specification for the outsourced tasks
        - looking for software to integrate the specifiations with our regular
    development and testing, or at least support development and testing
    - write half-yearly project report with progress and bugdet status
        - continued, not finished
    - Deadline for the board tasks: 3 weeks ahead of the meeting (the meeting is
   October 4th, deadline for the documents is September 13th)
* project planning with **Trond**
    - not done, but have been looking for software, see below
* Work on the name project with **Trond** and **Maaren**
    - nothing done
* Prepare for a Lule Sámi meeting with **Árran**
    - nothing done
* Follow up on place names from Norge Digitalt
    - waiting for further response from **Øystein Johannessen**
* Read through the Helsinki contracts (new translations)
    - browsed through them
    - added them to the menus, and rewrote the legal section text
* Talk to **Bitte** about the Lule Sámi lexicon
    - Bitte has been travelling
* Evaluate SFST as speller (and analyzer) lexicon
    - After project board meeting
* Other tasks:
    - looked into project management software - there's a [new
   page|/admin/projman.html] for it
    - also looked for software to help with writing and following requirements
   specification

##  Thomas
* work on Lule Sami compounding and derivation
**worked hard and still working
* Look at Linguistic bugs with **Trond**.
**solved some, some others are left
* Prepare for a Lule Sámi meeting with Árran

##  Tomi
* Aspell: Continue working on the affix file & aspell
    - Contact aspell author (UTF-8 thing)
***Not done
* three-part compounding
    - Not done
* corpus infrastructure: dtd location (both public and internal)
    - Not done
* corpus infrastructure: file and dir organisation
    - Not done
* Document aspell and corpus infrastructure
    - Done, partly
* Add html-to-xml conversion to corpus infra
    - Not done

##  Trond
* (**Trond** will be absent at next week's meeting, or perhaps
  accessible from Kastrup Airport)
* Work on the bug list.
* Work on compounds (three-part, with **Tomi**)
* Work on the corpus interface (with **Lars** and **Saara**)
* Work on the name agreement with "Norge digitalt" with **Thomas**
* Look at the linguistic aspects of the speller clitics, with
* Get the new version of the New Testament
* Introduce the new coworker to the work routines
* project planning with **Sjur**
* Work on the name project with **Maaren** and **Sjur**
* Prepare for a Lule Sámi meeting with Árran
* Work on the numerals project with **Maaren**

# 3. Documentation

Documentation tasks:

1. Add documentation on our corpus infrastructure and our corpus work in general
  ("To be done by the ones making the corpora": **Børre**, **Tomi**, **Trond**,
  **Saara**).
1. add/update Aspell documentation (**Tomi**)
1. finish divvun2web script (**Børre**)
1. as always: document what you're doing:-) (**all**)
1. divvun.no is turning white from time to time. Needs to be checked (Børre)
    1.  This was probably too little memory allocated to java (the default is
    64mb). Børre has now changed forrest.properties so that 256mb is allocated,
    and restarted the server.

# 4. Corpus gathering

See [notes from the 12.9. meeting](Meeting_2005-09-12.html#4.+Corpus+gathering)
for details about the steps forward.

Tasks:
* read through Trond's translations (**Børre**, **Sjur**)
* e-mail Kimmo Koskenniemi about the missing fourth contract, and about
  unclear paragraphs in the versions received (**Sjur**).
* send the license text to lawyers
* add a background document explaining the model

# 5. Corpus infrastructure

## Naming conventions and directory structure

See [notes from the 12.9.
meeting|Meeting_2005-09-12.html#Naming+conventions+and+directory+structure]
for details about the decision and implementation, as well as a list of tasks.

## Corpus conversion

### Pdf to XML

Extraction priority list
1. retain correct Sámi characters
1. retain word and sentence order
1. retain paragraph order
1. retain structure
    1. paragraphs
    1. titles, headers
    1. metadata (author, year, etc.)
    1. lists
    1. tables

Problems found so far using open-source tools:
* text gets correctly out, also regarding encoding
* paragraphs are correctly ordered, but not separated (i.e. one long paragraph)
* no structure

### HTML to XML

* we already have some tools according to Saara
* this is anyway easy, as HTML provides us with the structure we need
* what is needed is a transformation to our XML, + adding the metadata as usual
* it can wait at least a week or two (after pdf conversion is mostly done)

# 6. Linguistics

Test

## Name lexicon

See [notes from the 12.9. meeting](Meeting_2005-09-12.html#6.+Linguistics)

## North Sámi

* three-part compounds issue still open
    - **Trond, Maaren, Sjur** will look into this in Guovdageaidnu
* **Johnny Andersen** has written a letter to us on the treatment of Sámi place
  names, we need a contract with "Norge digitalt", via UFD. We will have to
  get such an agreement. This is a task for **Thomas** and **Trond**.
    - **Sjur** has written an e-mail to the UFD contact person,
   **Øystein Johannessen,** who will look into it soon.
* normativity issues:
    - the Giellalávdegoddi meeting is in October sometime

## Lule Sámi

* we need a lexicon
* compounding and derivation
    - **Thomas** has finished with deverbals, now working with denominals
    - most likely the same three-part compound problem in Lule Sámi as well
   (the middle stem shortens to a stem only found in such compounds)
    - it is possible that even the first stem shortens the same way
* Suffix boundary symbol has not been added, we are not sure whether we should
  do that.

## Numerals

1. An empirical overview
    1. Numeral generation
    1. Numeral inflection
    1. Numerals as parts of compounds
1. A clear concept of how we want to treat them
    1. Tagging
1. A treatment

# 7. Speller infrastructure

## Aspell

Write documentation here as well.

The munch-list is working, and the affix file is improving. See [15.8. meeting
memo|/admin/weekly/2005/Meeting_2005-08-15.html] for more.

See [12.9. meeting memo](/admin/weekly/2005/Meeting_2005-09-12.html#Aspell) for
a list of open issues.

# 8. Other

## Technical issues

* The mac os / perl bug (at least **Trond** and **Sjur** has it):
    - utf8 "\xC4" does not map to Unicode at /Users/trond/gt/script/preprocess line
   82. This msg did not show up in 10.3 (perl 5.8.1), but does so in 10.4 (perl
   5.8.6). It is probably a perl - OS mismatch. (**Trond**, **Thor Øivind**,
   **Tomi**)
        - Another **example:**
        - :"\x{00c3}" does not map to utf8 at ../script/preprocess line 113, <> chunk
    33.
* **Sjur** has a non-solved Backspace + UTF-8 issue
    -  This issue is now **fixed!** (I believe I had to specify a locale that was
    supported by the OS, such as no_NO.UTF-8, not the more "obscure" one I tried
    (nn_NO.UTF-8). Note that *locale* is now finally supported/available on
    MacOS X, since Tiger, cf *man locale*, at the end.
* CVS mailing to **Maaren**:
    - it is working, but she receives two copies of every message. I don't know
   why. It is a minor annoyance, but needs to be looked into. **Thomas** has the
   same problem. **Børre** will look into it (get rid of the double copies).

## Bug fixing

* 13 open bugs (and 24 risten.no bugs) - it seems **Sjur** can need some help
  with bug fixing in risten.no:-) (note: some of them are feature requests more
  than real bugs)
* some bugs are not real, but just not closed yet even though they are fixed.
  Please have a look at all the bugs you are assigned to. Do we need to set up
  an automatic reminder system? Something like sending an e-mail if the bug has
  been open and untouched for more than X weeks?
    - **Børre** to ask **Thor Øyvind** to configure Bugzilla to send e-mail
   reminders for open bugs not touched in a month.

## Memo and meeting practice update

From now on, next week's memo frame with task lists etc. will be made available
at the same day as the previous meeting's (finished) memo. This will make it
easy to use the task list in that memo as a reminder, and facilitates updating
it as you go - as soon as a task has been started, it can be commented and
problems described ready to be included in the next meeting. This can also be
done for the final status of the task, well ahead of the meeting.

# 9. Summary, task list

##  Børre
* Finish crontab specification for the cvs update/export script **Tomi** made
* Contact Svenska bibelsällskapet / **Olavi Korhonen**
* discuss with **Anders Kintel** about possible cooperation
* Follow up on CVS mailing:
    - Have a look at why **Maaren** and **Thomas** get two copies of every samicvs
   mail.
* Contact oahpahusossodat and the rest of the SD about texts
* Document the corpus infrastructure
* Read through the Helsinki contracts (new translations)
* Reorganise the directory structure
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml

##  Maaren
* The missing list, both the overall missing list from our xml corpus, and a
  file-for-file review, in order to get different terminology.
    - shall do it next week
* shall get mainly through the missing list from risten.no this week
    - working with risten.no this week also
* Start working on grammatical issues with **Thomas** and **Trond**
    - shall do it this week or next week?
* Work on the name project with **Trond** and **Sjur**
    - okei okei
* Start looking at normativity issues
    - shall do it this week
* Work on the numerals project with **Trond**
    - shall contact Trond

##  Saara
* Look at the corpus infrastructure issue
* Look at the corpus interface issue with Lars
* Convert texts from .doc to .xml, to get a grasp of our corpus format
* Have a look at the pdf-to-xml issue
    - use the priority list earlier in the memo for a guidance

##  Sjur
* risten.no bugs and fixes
* complete the action summary after our half-year evaluation
* follow up on:
    - voice group-chat not working to Sámediggi
        - Now awaiting cost evaluation from the IT guys (**Geir Kaaby** et al)
* To the board:
    - write draft specification for the outsourced tasks
    - write half-yearly project report with progress and bugdet status
    - Deadline for the board tasks: 3 weeks ahead of the meeting (the meeting is
   October 4th, deadline for the documents is September 13th)
* project planning with **Trond**
* Work on the name project with **Trond** and **Maaren**
* Prepare for a Lule Sámi meeting with Árran
* Follow up on place names from Norge Digitalt
* Read through the Helsinki contracts (new translations)
* Talk to **Bitte** about the Lule Sámi lexicon
* Evaluate SFST as speller (and analyzer) lexicon
* prepare for the Guovdageaidnu meeting:
    - name lexicon
    - three-part compounds
* e-mail **Kimmo Koskenniemi** about contract issues

##  Thomas
* work on Lule Sami compounding and derivation
* Look at Linguistic bugs with **Trond**.
* Prepare for a Lule Sámi meeting with Árran

##  Tomi
* Aspell: Continue working on the affix file & aspell
    - Contact aspell author (UTF-8 thing)
* three-part compounding
* corpus infrastructure: dtd location (both public and internal)
* corpus infrastructure: file and dir organisation
* Document aspell and corpus infrastructure
* Add html-to-xml conversion to corpus infra

##  Trond
* (**Trond** will be absent at next week's meeting, or perhaps
  accessible from Kastrup Airport)
* Work on the bug list.
* Work on compounds (three-part, with **Tomi**)
* Work on the corpus interface (with **Lars** and **Saara**)
* Work on the name agreement with "Norge digitalt" with **Thomas**
* Look at the linguistic aspects of the speller clitics, with
* Get the new version of the New Testament
* Introduce the new coworker to the work routines
* project planning with **Sjur**
* Work on the name project with **Maaren** and **Sjur**
* Prepare for a Lule Sámi meeting with Árran
* Work on the numerals project with **Maaren**
* Prepare for three-part compounds meeting in Guovdageaidnu

# 10. Next meeting, closing

26.09.2005 10:00

Closed at 11:10
