# Meeting setup

* Date: 04.07.2005
* Time: 12.30 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are :-)
* Tools: Phone, iChat, SubEthaEdit

#  Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from a week ago
1. Corpus gathering
1. Linguistics
1. risten.no
1. Other issues
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 12.33. Agenda accepted as is.

Present: Maaren, Sjur, Thomas

Absent: Børre, Trond, Tomi

Main secretary: Sjur

# 2. Reviewing the task list from the last meeting

##  Maaren:
* The missing list, both the overall missing list from our xml corpus, and a file-for-file
  review, in order to get different terminology
    - Added 777 missing words!
* Go through the missing list from risten.no
    - The list has not yet been available
* Wrote letter to SGL (Sámi Giellalávdegoddi) with the issues identified by Thomas (slightly
  rewised, see the list of normativity issues)

##  Sjur:
* Ask Anne-Britt to update the contract with the University (we are getting 3, not 2,
  persons there from the fall)
    - Anne-Britt is now on vacation (should still write the letter)
* risten.no bugs and fixes
    - updated CVS with lots of new bugs, fixed some
* Give Maaren (or: add to the gt/sme/corp corpus) a list of the risten.no words
    - done
* write the LIST option to our test tools, as requested in the discussion group
    - not done yet
* complete the action summary after our half-year evaluation
    - not done
* contact Kimmo Koskenniemi about kwic-snt and UTF-8 bug
    - not done
* voice group-chat not working to Sámediggi
    - sent new e-mail to SD IT guys with proper inforamtion for them to act on
* Maaren has problems with SubEthaEdit (can't connect)
    - included in the e-mail above (see previous task)
    - more testing to identify the cause
* add i18n bug to Forrest issue tracker
    - not done
* add i18n menu as feature request to Forrest issue tracker
    - not done

##  Thomas:
* wait for proofreading of the last QA on smj translations
    - Hasn´t yet been proofread
* write to Hans Ragnar Mahtisen about the parallel placenames
    - Waiting for Trond to check if the names we have got from H-R are parallel or not
* work with Lule Sami adjectives
    - Done what I can do for the moment. The pos. suffix paradigms for even syllable nom and
   gen/acc prooved not to be precise enough in normative grammars, so we have made a kind
   of maximal paradigm based on the descriptive work of Harald Grundström and Juhani
   Lehtiranta. Now waiting for Trond to implement the new pos. suffix paradigm
        - The question whether the norm should be open or restrictive should be sent to SGL.
    Thomas will write a letter, which Maaren will put into the SD document archive and send out.

##  Vacationists since last meeting

### Børre
* Vacation

###  Tomi:
* Vacation
* cvs update script for divvun documentation
    - partly done - it works for manual updates

### Trond
* Vacation
* Work on the bug list (Lule Sámi).
    - done some, much left
* Work on the corpus interface (with Lars)
    - some discussion in the newsgroup
* Get back to Xerox on the commercial license.
    - wrote a new e-mail reminding them that they should come back with an answer
* Check Hans-Ragnars names.
    - not done
* Give Thomas a telephone, and a crash-course in setting up phone meetings
    - done

# 3. Corpus gathering

Not much have happened. See Thomas' notes above.

# 4. Linguistics

## sme

Maaren will continue the work with the missing lists.

## smj

* Thomas working with substantives now until vacation (and well after).
* Trond working with bugs after vacation (next week).

# 5. risten.no

Sjur will continue to use some time on the following issues:

* more bug fixing
* a couple of critical features still needs to be added

# 6. Other issues

Nothing.

# 7. Summary, task list

##  Maaren:
* The missing list, both the overall missing list from our xml corpus, and a file-for-file
  review, in order to get different terminology
* Go through the missing list from risten.no
* send new letter to SGL about Lule Sámi possessives

##  Sjur:
* Ask Anne-Britt to update the contract with the University (we are getting 3, not 2,
  persons there from the fall)
* risten.no bugs and fixes
* write the LIST option to our test tools, as requested in the discussion group
* complete the action summary after our half-year evaluation
* contact Kimmo Koskenniemi about kwic-snt and UTF-8 bug
* follow up on:
    - voice group-chat not working to Sámediggi
    - Maaren has problems with SubEthaEdit (can't connect)
* add i18n bug to Forrest issue tracker
* add i18n menu as feature request to Forrest issue tracker
* To the board: write proposal for permanent maintenance organisation
* To the board: write draft specification for the outsourced tasks
* To the board: write agenda, question: should the memos be public?
* Deadline for the board tasks: 3 weeks ahead of meeting (date not decided, but
  in September)

##  Thomas:
* bug proofreader for proofreading of the last QA on smj translations
* write new letter to SGL about Lule Sámi possessives
* work with Lule Sami substantives

##  On vacation

Tasks are transferred to the following weeks until they return from vacation, to
keep the tasks alive and updated till after vacation. New tasks may be added:-)

### Børre
* Add crontab specification for the cvs update/export script Tomi made
* Correct the war file/jspwiki issue
* Continue http://giellatekno.uit.no conversion to forrest ...
* Contact Svenska bibelsällskapet
* Add issue to forrest issue tracker about utf-8 ihtml documents.
    - Check for existing bug reports, it might already be in there
* Continue forrest i18n research
    - Sometimes abides the =locale=se/smj/fi in the url (the document gets
   correctly selected). The menus and tabs are translated to the language
   that the browser asks for.
* add RSS newsfeed support (check with Sjur/risten.no)
* discuss with Anders Kintel about whether we could get the Sámi-Norwegian dictionary
  ahead of acceptance

###  Tomi:
* Common Makefile for all the languages
* catxml default language issue
* three-part compounding
* decapitalisation of proper nouns when (if?) compounded, and when derived 
  (the oslolaš issue)
* cvs update script for divvun documentation
* corpus infrastructure: dtd location (both public and internal)

### Trond
* Work on the bug list (Lule Sámi).
* Work on compounds (both regular and three-part, with Tomi)
* Work on the corpus interface (with Lars)
* Corpus infrastructure: dtd location
* Get the new version of the New Testament
* Get back to Xerox on the commercial license.
* Check Hans-Ragnars names.
* Give Thomas a telephone, and a crash-course in setting up phone meetings

# 8. Next meeting, closing

11.07.2005 10:00

Closed at 13:20
