# Meeting setup

* Date: 05.12.2005
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are :-)
* Tools: iChat, SubEthaEdit, phone

#  Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from two weeks ago
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. name lexicon infrastructure
1. Other issues
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 09:48.

Present: **Børre (after 15 min), Saara, Sjur, Thomas (only a few minutes), Tomi**

Absent: **Maaren, Trond**

Main secretary: **Sjur**

Agenda accepted as is.

# 2. Reviewing the task list from the last meeting

##  Børre
* Gather public texts
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
* Document the corpus directory structure
* Ask **Thor Øivind** to move bugzilla to our new webserver
    - ... or make the URL [http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla] point to the present
   installation
* install new XXE and the new XXE Forrest config for Ilona
* divvun.no and giellatekno.uit.no
    -  Binary files download area
    -  Continue the conversion to static site, using our own script.
* corpus xsl files under version control

##  Maaren
* working with risten.no
* register AppleCare
    - **Børre** did it.
* find decisisons/documents regarding syllable shortening in compounds in the
  norm; send them to **Thomas**

##  Saara
* Look at the corpus infrastructure issue
* Look at the corpus interface issue with Lars
* look into efficient editing of the xml proper name lexicon (tools, modes, etc)
* Convert the name lexicon from present format to xml
    - not done
* Look at the hyphenation issue
    - implemented in preprocess, see documentation
* corpus xsl files under version control
    - discussion going on
* Make preprocess faster
    - preprocess is now as fast as possible with Perl implementation. Now I am 
considering also other tools.

##  Sjur
* Lule Sámi twol problems, look again at the sets definition with **Thomas** and
  **Trond**
    - nothing
* risten.no bugs and fixes
    - recovered the lost data after the crash, prepared a new install, but were
   unable to install it due to network problems at SD
* follow up on voice group-chat not working to Sámediggi
    - Test Marratech
        - no URL yet
* project planning with **Trond**, continued
    - also look at the development processes - specification and  testing
    - nothing
* Follow up on place names from Norge Digitalt
    - write an e-mail to or call **Bjørn Olav Megard**
        - he had forgotten about it.
* Evaluate SFST as speller (and analyzer) lexicon
    - more thorough analysis than was possible in Guovdageaidnu
    - nothing
* write a background document on the corpus contracts
    - nothing
* discuss kvensk project support with **Trond**
    - nothing
* proper name integration with risten.no
    - nothing
* discuss risten.no work with **Tomi**
    - continued
* write public tender documents
    - nothing
* hyphenation in corpus docs
    - nothing
* buy:
    - new computer (project server)?
    - nothing
* Work on the Speech Application (Dec. 1)
    - done
* Work on the proofing article (Dec. 5.)
    - done
* Investigate the never-arriving backpacks
    - done

##  Thomas
* work on North sámi compounding and derivation
**worked and still working
* Settle the empirical facts for sme diphthong simpl.
**done
* add descriptive facts about shortened forms in compounding from our corpus 
  to the normativity issues document
**done

##  Tomi
* Aspell: Continue working on the affix file & aspell
    - Contact aspell author (UTF-8 thing)
        - Not done
* three-part compounding
    - Not done -> transferred to **Thomas, Trond and Sjur**
* corpus infrastructure: dtd location (both public and internal)
    - Not done
* Document aspell and corpus infrastructure
    - Nothing done
* Specification for new catxml in C++
    - this includes also placing the source and binary
        - Not done
* discuss about xml-processing with **Saara**
* start looking at conversion of the name lexicon from present format to xml
    - Looked a bit
* Look into synchronisation of proper names with risten.no
    - Not done
* hyphenation in corpus docs
    - Not done
* corpus xsl files under version control
    - Not done
* add automatic language detection to the corpus processing
    - Looked at the language detection documentation
* Work on the proofing article (Dec. 5.)
    - Done
* remove last part of complex names not used as simplex names
    - Not done

##  Trond
* Look at the three-part compound issue
* Work on the CG-related bugs on the bug list (7 open) (numeral related ones
  postponed.
* project planning with **Sjur**, continued
* discuss kvensk project support with **Sjur**
* Work on the G3 bug issue with **Sjur** and **Thomas**, carry it over to sme.
* Working on the Speech Application (Dec. 1)
* Working on the proofing article (Dec. 5.)

# 3. Documentation

Documentation tasks:

Add documentation on our corpus infrastructure and our corpus work in general
(**Børre**, **Tomi**, **Trond**, **Saara**). For the basic corpora, we need 2
additional types of documentation, or doc for 2 target groups:

1. For the **users/linguists:** What corpus are found, how do I use them (this
  info is now scattered) 
  (Part of the HOWTO USE is documented in the catxml docu
  The what documents are found where etc + an overall documentation is not
  written, since the corpus is so sparsely populated)
    1. catxml done, which is what is needed mostly. Do we need more?
    1. we need a review: **Thomas, Maaren, Linda, Ilona, Trond**
1. For the **collectors:** How do I add texts, where do I add them, how do I
  convert them (this is (partly?) done in the Corpus Conversion document)
    1. we need a review of the web interface for corpus uploading - what is still
   missing?
        1. Review: **Sjur, Saara, Trond, Thomas**

Review setup and reporting to be posted to the newsgroup, possibly a summary in
our documentation. **Saara** to make a review template, to be posted in the
newsgroup and commented before the actual review is started.

**Deadline** for comments and final template: by next meeting.

test:

* add/update Aspell documentation (**Tomi**)
    - Some documentation has been written, but there still is work to be done.
* as always: document what you're doing:-) (**all**)

Tomcat->static HTML progress

Now, all pages are generated directly from XML by Forrest within Tomcat. We'll
change to let Forrest pre-generate the HTML (and pdf), and serve these
ready-made files directly.

**Deadline:** Finished by this week.

# 4. Corpus gathering

The Lule Sámi New Testament is ready for inclusion in our repository
and will be added today. We then have our first Lule Sámi corpus text!

## Contracts

Next step:

1. Make **our** versions of the updated Helsinki contracts, and make sure they
  are according to our intention. (**Sjur and Trond**)
1. send them to the SD lawyer and to the University lawyer through formal
  channels. (**Sjur and Trond**)

Contract 1 should have the main priority (contract 2 for **Trond**).

# 5. Corpus infrastructure

Updated task list:
1. Include the xsl files under version control (**Børre, Tomi, Saara**)
    1. Saara has started a dicsussion in the newsgroup - please follow up!
        1. we can start using RCS right away, and we do so. The main users should be
    comfortable with two version control systems, and it is (relatively) easy
    to upgrade to CVS later, if we want that.
1. Incorporate language detection as part of the corpus processing (**Saara**)
1. we need a way to deal with hyphenated documents (documents with (manually)
  inserted hyphenation marks) in catxml/preprocess.
    1. What needs to be identified now is the conditions for the difference between
   "ealahus-<CR> ja ..." and "ea-la-hus-os-so-dat". The result should be:
   "ealahus- ja ..." and "ea<hyph/>la<hyph/>hus<hyph/>os<hyph/>so<hyph/>dat".
   Only hyphens as part of text should be tagged (that is, used to hyphenate a
   word at the end of a line, or to indicate syllabification for such
   hyphenation), hyphens in dates and other numeric expressions should be left
   as is.
        1. identify all cases of the first type, and replace all hyphens **NOT** in
    this set with the <hyph/> tag (**Saara**).
        1. we need to review whether only automatic hyphen detection is good enough, or
    whether manual post-processing in some form is needed. Delayed until we have
    some results to base the review on.
        1. Acceptable results: 90% of all real hyphens correctly tagged.

# 6. Linguistics

## Name lexicon

Summary: see the [newsgroup](news:di5mbi$26ad$1@news.uit.no)

The plan for this project was as follows: Two lines of work run in parallel:

1. name markup
    1. Done! There are errors in the markup, people are urged to correct them as they
   pop up.

## Complex names

Task list for this issue:

* Restoring two-part names
    - done, common/src/proper-complex.xml
* find eventual unique second-parts (B-parts of names that do not exist in
  isolation): Take the 1.126 version, remove the non-last parts, and compare the
  B-parts of proper-complex.xml with the simplex forms in 1.126. Non-hits should
  then be removed from the current propernoun-sme-lex.txt.
    - Postponed till next week
* remove these B-parts from the ordinary name file (**Tomi**)
* make sure xml2lexc can handle complex names in ways compatible with our
  present tool chain (=reconstruct the lexc format we have now) (**Saara**)
* the resulting file format should be identical to our present prop-name
  file (=lexc), that can then be converted to our new xml format using the same
  script as for the regular names (**Tomi or Saara**, but only when the
  technical details are settled)
* The core issue: The preprocess script can handle (A + B) compounds, but not
  (A + inflected B).

## North Sámi

* three-part compounds issue still open
    - look at Lule Sámi, but apply it to second-parts only
        - Thomas is finished with three-part compounds for North Sámi. On the negative
    side, we note a compilation time of 10m for the sme parser as a whole.
    - the exact rules for when shortening happens should be documented (**Maaren**
   will send the normativity decisions to **Thomas**)
    - linguistic analysis/discussion to continue in the newsgroup
    - we should include the members-to-be of the Sámi Giellalávdegoddi (SGL) in
   this discussion, but how? We need a common meeting / normativity seminar /
   seminar on proofing issues and on language technology in a broader sense with
   them. Then we also need to open the linguistic issues newsgroup we talked
   about earlier, and set up their computers and teach them to use the
   newsgroup. This seminar needs to include the Lule Sámi section of SGL (others
   are welcome too).
   Timetable:
        - The Sámediggiráddi is going to appoint new members before Christmas
    (**Johan Mikkel Saara** is asking people)
        - Contact the SGL when it is elected, in December, and ask them to arrange a
    normativity seminar, with invited keypersons.
        - seminar in February?
    - TODO list:
        - **Maaren** to discuss with relevant persons on this issue.
* number project still open (see below)
* diphthong simplification/G3 issue should be carried over from Lule Sámi.
    - TODO: 
        - Writing the rules (copy from smj, adjust) (**Sjur, Thomas** and **Trond**,
    next week)

## Lule Sámi

Great progress has been made on the G3 issue, just some minor points remain.
oa:å has been carried over to ä:e

Open tasks:
* Derived G3 that looks like G2 are still open. 
    - **Thomas, Trond and Sjur** meet shortly after Dec. 5th to finish the rest.

Today's compilation time:

real    5m17.157s
user    3m26.827s
sys     0m5.070s

## Numerals

The following North Sámi linguistic issues should be settled before going into
the numeral project:

1. Three-part compounds
1. Diphthong simplification
1. Derivation

These issues are recently done in Lule Sámi, and it is more efficient to
complete them in North Sámi directly thereafter instead of beginning a new topic

Numeral treatment is on different level in the existing sme and smj parsers, but
the issue itself is common to the two langauges, and should therefore be treated
in parallel.

Numerals in North Sámi:
Inventory is listed elsewhere.

Numerals in Lule Sámi:
There are 70 lines of code setting up the structure for case inflection of basic
numerals.

# 7. Name lexicon infrastructure

Present proposal:
* name-oriented, single document:
    - one name with many uses stored only once

Present risten.no:
* Concept-oriented center, contains:
    - ID, links to each language entry
* each language as a separate document, with links to the concept/entity in the
  cross-lingual center

Possible new propsal 1: as risten.no

Possible new proposal 2: separate documents:
* Containing one common concept or name id field, plus Divvun/Disamb fields only
* Containing one common concept or name id field, plus kvensk fields only
* common document containing one common id field, plus fields common to several
  bases

Porsanger both person and place
Porsáŋgu only as place name, not as person name.

5 lgs give 10 Trosterud, 5 Timbuktu, it would be better to have 2 Trosterud
and  1 Timbuktu, but 15 contlexica for these three concepts.

Discussion to continue in the newsgroup.

Tasks:
1. testing of conversion
1. continue the discussion of the name lexicon format
  (**Saara, Tomi, Sjur, Trond**)
1. implement a prototype in eXist
1. eXist as editor:
    1. develop the needed XQueries and interface
    1. synchronisation between risten.no and 
    1. test whether eXist as editor is actually working well

# 8. Other

## Technical issues

* The mac os / perl bug (at least **Trond** and **Sjur** has it, [Bugzilla
  #211|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=211]):
    - utf8 "\xC4" does not map to Unicode at /Users/trond/gt/script/preprocess line
   82. This msg did not show up in 10.3 (perl 5.8.1), but does so in 10.4 (perl
   5.8.6). It is probably a perl - OS mismatch. (**Trond**, **Saara**,
   **Tomi**)
    - Test: the result of the last line should indicate whehter this is a problem
   in cat or a Perl/OS mismatch.
```
   preprocess file_name.txt OK
   cat file_name.txt | preprocess !!
   catxml file_name.xml | preprocess ??
```

## Video conferencing across firewalls

We're still waiting for a working URL (working from outside SD, that is).

## Bug fixing

**28** open bugs (and 2 risten.no bugs)

## Move Bugzilla

Move Bugzilla to the same server as the other ones (or make it work at the
expected URL: http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/).

TODO, TODO. **Thor Øivind**.

## risten.no

The risten.no data has been rescued, and a new version of eXist is ready for
installation. The installation has not been done due to the network problems at
SD. Will be done this week, probably today. Also, an even newer version of eXist
has been released (snapshot from last Saturday).

Tomi will continue the proper name work.

##  Rugsacks

Were delivered on Nov 25. They have disappeared at UiTø, but that is now being
investigated. Two were also properly delivered at SD/Guovdageaidnu.

# 9. Summary, task list

##  Børre
* Gather public texts
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
* Document the corpus directory structure
* Ask **Thor-Øivind** to move bugzilla to our new webserver
    - ... or make the URL [http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla] point to the present
   installation
* install new XXE and the new XXE Forrest config for Ilona
* divvun.no and giellatekno.uit.no:
    -  Binary files download area
    -  Continue the conversion to static site, using our own script.
* corpus xsl files under version control
* review the convert2xml.pl script, what works well and what doesn´t.
* comment review template made by **Saara**
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Maaren
* work with risten.no
* find decisisons/documents regarding syllable shortening in compounds in the
  norm; send them to **Thomas**
* review corpus usage documentation
* discuss with relevant people regarding seminar on proofing tools, normativity
  and SGL in February

##  Saara
* Look at the corpus infrastructure issue
* Look at the corpus interface issue with Lars
* Convert the name lexicon from present format to xml
* discuss the new lexicon format in the newsgroup
* document corpus infrastructure, your own parts
* corpus infrastr. user docu review: make a template, and post it in the
  newsgroup
* Language detection for the corpus files
* Implement addition of <hyph> tags to the converted corpus files  
* Do some testing for bug
  [#211](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=211)
* update the convert2xml script according to the comments
* review corpus upload user interface
* corpus xsl files under version control
* xml2lexc update to handle complex names: construct entries like we have now
  from the different parts of a complex name entry
* update preprocess to handle inflected forms of complex names
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* Lule Sámi twol problems, look again at the sets definition with **Thomas** and
  **Trond**
* follow up on voice group-chat not working to Sámediggi
    - Test Marratech
* project planning with **Trond**, continued
    - also look at the development processes - specification and  testing
* Follow up on place names from Norge Digitalt
    - write an e-mail to or call **Bjørn Olav Megard**
* Evaluate SFST as speller (and analyzer) lexicon
    - more thorough analysis than was possible in Guovdageaidnu
* write a background document on the corpus contracts
* discuss kvensk project support
* proper names:
    - discuss lexicon format
    - discuss implementation with Tomi
* write public tender documents
* hyphenation in corpus docs
* buy:
    - new computer (project server)?
* Work on the Speech Application (Dec. 1)
* Work on the proofing article (Dec. 5.)
* Investigate the never-arriving backpacks
* update the SD contract version
* send SD corpus contract to lawyer
* review corpus upload user interface
* comment review template made by **Saara**
* update SD contracts
* send SD contracts to SD lawyer
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Thomas
* work on North sámi compounding and derivation
* review corpus upload user interface
* review corpus usage documentation
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Tomi
* Aspell: Continue working on the affix file & aspell
    - Contact aspell author (UTF-8 thing)
* corpus infrastructure: dtd location (both public and internal)
* Document aspell and corpus infrastructure
* Specification for new catxml in C++
    - this includes also placing the source and binary
* new proper name lexicon
    - remove last part of complex names not used as simplex names
    - start looking at conversion of the name lexicon from present format to xml
    - discuss the new lexicon format in the newsgroup
    - Look into synchronisation of proper names with risten.no
* hyphenation in corpus docs
* corpus xsl files under version control
* comment review template made by **Saara**
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Trond
* Look at the three-part compound issue
* Work on the CG-related bugs on the bug list (7 open) (numeral related ones
  postponed.
* project planning with **Sjur**, continued
* discuss kvensk project support with **Sjur**
* Work on the G3 bug issue with **Sjur** and **Thomas**, carry it over to sme.
* document corpus infrastructure, your part
* update the SD contract version
* send SD corpus contract to lawyer
* review corpus upload user interface
* review corpus usage documentation
* comment review template made by **Saara**
* discuss the new lexicon format in the newsgroup
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

# 10. Next meeting, closing

12.12.2005 09:30

Closed at 11:12
