Meeting minutes: Inari Saami-Finnish dictionary

Present: Ciprian, Hannu, Marja-Liisa, Miina, Petter, Trond

# Topic

Entry: how it looks like (order)

- Nouns & Adjectives: lemma; what other forms?
- Verbs: lemma

* Presentation format in the paper version
* Dictionary orthography
* Content:
    - errors in generated wordforms (for ex. weather verbs, fautive attr. forms, wrong inflections)
    - lemmas not in analyser
    - lemmas with unexpected POS
    - issues in the finnish translation

#  Presentation format in the paper version

 - max size: 500 pages
 - two columns




Trond's suggestions:

```
>>>>čuáđáád A attr čuáđádis, čuáđádâs; gen čuáđáád; ill čuáđádân<<< sadas A

čuálgui N gen čuolguu; ill čuolgui kanki N
myetistiđ V mun myetistâm; sun myetist; sij myetisteh sataa V

... with A, N, V bold, t
```

Sammallahti 1993 as a model:

* Lemma in bold
* POS in ???
* Context info in bold?
* All inflected forms in bold
* re field in plain and parentheses
* translation field in parentheses
* translation POS in ???
* example in italics
* example translation in plain

Output from us:

1. XML according to Trond's suggestion ...
    1. ordered according to word class and then alphabetically, with info on missing forms

The xml-to-table will then come later.

#  Dictionary orthography

```
 tiettiđ - mun tiä'đám
 kiel'diđ - mun kiäldám
 fiet'tiđ - mun fiet'tiim

 kuor'gâ, gen. kuorgâ
 viermi, gen. viermi
```

#  Content:

##  errors in generated wordforms (for ex. weather verbs, fautive attr. forms, wrong i)

### Presentation of verbs

```

 354 dat
2265 mun
   5 sii
  41 upers


 '"dat"'
vievgŋat
dokŋat
riežádit
rádnát
ruoksát

 '"mun"'
dokŋadit
mannet
risset
dohppehallat
divrrastallat

 '"sii"'
deaivvadit
oaidnalit
čoagganit
čoahkkanit
dikkáskit

 '"upers"'
bievlat
ránodit
soaiggáhallat
biekkastit
bivaldit
```

##  lemmas not in analyser

```
     125 adj_not_in_analyser.list
     578 nouns_not_in_analyser.list
      61 plural_nouns_not_in_analyser.list
     764 total
```


They should be added

##  lemmas with unexpected POS

These should be corrected

##  issues in the Finnish translation

This will come after reading the PDF

##  FST work

Miina, Marja-Liisa and Petter will discuss and then invite Lene and Trond to a meeting on this

# Plan

1. Ciprian makes pdf version as specified (**Due: 15.11.2017**)
1. Miina, Marja-Liisa, Petter makes an estimate as to what it takes to correct the content (**Due: Before Hannu's budget meeting**)
1. Wordforms (**ongoing**)
    1. Miina, Marja-Liisa, Petter corrects generated wordforms,
    1. Miina, Marja-Liisa, Petter and Trond, Lene correct the analyser
1. Words missing in the analyser (**Due: 24.11.2017**)
    1. Miina, Marja-Liisa goes through the missing lists (*_not_in_analyser.list) and proofread them, if needed classify them
    1. Miina, Marja-Liisa and Trond, Lene add the corrected lemmas to the analyser
1. Verb classification according to choice of subject
    1. This will become clear when the pdf comes.
    1. Ciprian scripts this from sme via smesmn, and Trond gives it a look. Thereafter to the Inari team
