# S&T-møte 1.6.2022

Saker:
- Alberta neste veke
- giella-shared vs shared-XXX
- SMA-nummer av Nordlyd
- Luleå


# Alberta neste veke

Frå Antti:
> 2\. Special themes with UiT contributions
>
> Currently we're envisioning the theme session on:
>
> 1) what role language technology and computational resources can play in language pedagogy and how, that we've requested you to prepare introductory presentations for, to take place on Tuesday afternoon (at least the first 1.5h at 2.00-3.30pm MDT, if not longer).
>
> Besides that, I'm presuming that Sjur being in Europe would make having
>
>2) the spell-checking / morpheme-completion / keyboards session work best Wednesday morning, taking up the first 1.5h during 9am-noon.

## Tromsøtema i programmet

Sjå nedanfor. Vi er bede om:
- lgtech in lg education
- spellchecking, morpheme completion, ...

Diskutere dette ca. kl 14.00 norsk tid måndag

## Programmet

Monday, June 6
- 9:00 – 11:50 AM – Partner Introductions and Presentations
- 2:00 – 05:00 PM – Partner Introductions and Presentations

Tuesday, June 7

- 10:00 – 11:50 AM – Partnership Council
- 02:00 – 05:00 PM – Workshop: How Language Technology can be Harnessed in Language Education — **UiT**

Wednesday, June 8

- 9:00 – 11:50 AM – Workshop Spell-checking etc. — **UiT**
- 2:00 – 05:00 PM – Workshop

### PARTNER INTRODUCTIONS & PRESENTATIONS

On this day, participants will have the opportunity to introduce themselves and share their Partnership-relevant research and work activities. Presentations will run for ~20 minutes for individual and partner presentations and more time is allotted for presentations from the Indigenous Language Community Partners. Scheduling of the presentations will be based on availability.

### PARTNERSHIP COUNCIL

During this Council, we will report on the Y3 finances, follow up on outstanding items from the Winter PGM, and discuss matters for the mid-term report. If you have any items that you would like to raise during the Council, please contact us and we will do our best to accommodate suggested topics of discussion.

### WORKSHOPS & TUTORIALS

The dates and time for each of the workshop themes are yet to be determined. Please check back for updates.

- How Language Technology can be Harnessed in Language Education
- Possibilities of Speech Technology in Language Revitalization
- Keyboards, Spell Checkers, and Morpheme Completion: Writing Indigenously on Mobile Devices
- Demonstrations of Morphodict and the Speech Database

# giella-shared vs shared-XXX

```
giella-shared # går ut
shared-eng    # engelske namn, laga for Canada
shared-mul    # symbol og teiknsetjing
shared-smi    # internasjonale namn (Timbuktu)
shared-urj-Cyrl # russiske namn felles for uralske språk
```

`giella-shared` er på veg ut.

`smj` får `sme`-namn (dvs. namn frå `sme`-prop utan `+OLANG/`) **i nominativ**. Viss dei skal bli bøygd må dei inn i `smj` som vanlege `smj`-namn.

Meld problem som **issue** i relevant git-katalog.

# SMA-nummer av Nordlyd

Møte kl 12 i dag?

# Luleå

Tidsfrist/tidsplan? Sjur sjekkar med Inga.
