# Corpus meeting 11.4.2011

Present: Berit Merete, Børre, Ciprian, Tomi, Trond

# Agenda

* Bugzilla
* Status quo
* Forward

#  Bugzilla

## 983	maj	P2	xsl conv	boerre@skolelinux.no	Multiple copies of sma files in corpus

### The bug itself

20-or-so left (cf. list in bug). **Børre** to close it.

### Extention

1. A follow-up would be (is) to follow up for the other languages: in the whole corpus (free+bound).
1. We also risk having double content (same file, two names)
    1. Detect: sort by line and look for double lines
1. General problem: test of NOT adding already existing files
    1. Script for doing that?

The last point should await a somewhat working corpus.

## 301	enh	P5	Text cor	borre.gaup@samediggi.no	Proofed/unproofed parallel files need better treatment

This is not a bug, it is a feature.

"We are receiving both proofread and unproofed documents from Min Áigi, and some
of them in parallel (the same doc as both versions). For the time being we are
not able to make any real use of that info, but we should. Here are some
thoughts about possible processing:"

Suggestion: Make a web page / project for goldstandard improvement, and close this bug.
(Trond has commented)

## 841	maj	P2	Text cor	ciprian.gerstenberger@uit.no	Nested error markup does not get correctly converted to xml

This is the only real bug on this list. So, this is for Cip (and Sjur). Check with Lene for a reasonable deadline (mid august?).

## 838	nor	P3	xsl conv	ciprian.gerstenberger@uit.no	Log file creation not permitted by some users

Cip closes.

## 836	cri	P2	xsl conv	ciprian.gerstenberger@uit.no	Replace all xsl:include with xsl:import in corpus stylesh...

Old metafiles. These attributes (xsl:include inside the xsl file for each and every corpus file) does not apply anymore.

**TODO:** Børre to write an explanation in the bug, and Ciprian to close.

Have a look at line 151 in gt/script/langTools/Converter.pm

There is common.xsl and whatnot combined into a new .xsl file

## 835	cri	P3	xsl conv	ciprian.gerstenberger@uit.no	Corpus conversion xsl files missing from $CORPUSHOME/bin/

This is Cip's cup of tea.

## 941	nor	P3	xsl conv	sjur.moshagen@samediggi.no	Combination of $GTFREE/orig/sme/facta/659_1.pdf.xsl and $...

```
#14
var whole
runtime error: file /home/boerre/gtsvn/gt/script/corpus/common.xsl line 777
element param
xsltApplyXSLTTemplate: A potential infinite template recursion was detected.
You can adjust xsltMaxDepth (--maxdepth) in order to raise the maximum number
of nested template calls and variables/params (currently set to 3000).
Templates:
```

This is an error with the $GTHOME/gt/script/corpus/common.xsl file, and B has no idea what error.

The following lines are not a result of this:

```
para_ref after type03
 Reinbeitedistrikt som presses av
selskap som žnsker å bygge ut
vindmžlleparker står i en vanskelig
situasjon. Et frivillig forlik med
utbygger om en erstatning, kan
vŽre å foretrekke fremfor en usikker kamp i rettssystemet. I distrikt
6 i Varanger valgte man den fžrste
```

Rather, they are a result of decode.pm.

For Børre, the conversion stops when applying common.xsl on the file.

**TODO:** Cip to have a look.

## 884	enh	P5	Correct!	sjur.moshagen@samediggi.no	corpus.dtd seems flawed

To repeat:

xmllint whatever-dtd-file-of-your-choice.dtd

… will give you the same error report.

#  Status quo

Tomi has work which is not checked in. **Check in**.

File- and problemspecific problems go to Bugzilla.

#  Forward

New meeting on monday.
