!!!Meeting setup

* Date: 22.01.2007
* Time: 09.00 Norw. time
* Place: Where we are
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat

!!!Agenda

# Opening, agenda review
# Reviewing the task list from last week
# Documentation - divvun.no
# Corpus gathering
# Corpus infrastructure
# Infrastructure
# Linguistics
# name lexicon infrastructure
# Spellers
# Other issues
# Summary, task lists
# Closing

!!!1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 9:39.

Present: __Børre, Maaren, Sjur, Steinar, Thomas, Tomi, Trond__

Absent: __Saara__

Agenda accepted as is.

!!!2. Updated task status since last meeting

!! Børre
* continue work on script for automatic testing of the spell checker in Word
** not done
* fix {{sme}} texts in corpus this month
** not done
* find missing {{nob}} parallel texts in corpus
** not done
* translate Windows installer text to {{sme}} and {{smj}}
** some done
* work on the Polderland data generation (PLX format conversion)
** Concentrate on compounding
* go through other directories, fix parallelity information for other documents
** not done
* add {{sma}} texts to the corpus repository
** not done
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]
** not done
* other:
** fixed giellatekno.uit.no forrest. It had a strange bug which led to circular building.


!! Maaren
* tasks according to Thomas
**done some

!! Saara
* fix {{sme}} texts in corpus this month
** fixed handling of msword document arrays.
* send aligned, xml {{nob}} texts to __Kristen__
** will be done finally today.
* fix problems with xml2lexc if needed
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]
** fixed couple of preprocessor bugs.


!! Sjur
* name lexicon:
** restructure interface code for easier maintenance, coding and use
*** some work, found a recently introduced bug in Forrest's handling of HTML
    source files (fixed and commited)
** refactor the rest of the SD-terms editor code
** implement missing propnouns editing functions
** implement improvements decided upon in Tromsø
* hire linguist and programmer
** contacted one more candidate for the linguist position; started writing
   specification for the programmer position
* get an Intel Mac for testing Windows spellers
** gave spec to __Børre__ - asked him to do the order
* publish corpus contracts and project infra on NoDaLi-sta
** wrote most of the e-mail for the announcement, but found a couple of loose
   ends in our infra, that needs to be tied up
* fix stuorra-oslolaš lower case {{o}}
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]
* other tasks:
** Polderland follow-ups
** several requests to get clarification on Microsoft Sámi language codes in MS
   Office / Mac (2004 & 2008)


!! Steinar
* Complete the semantic sets in sme-dis.rle
** done some work
* missing lists
** done some work
* report conversion errors to __Saara__
** not done
* Look at the actio compound issue when adding from missing lists
** not done
* Go through the Num bugs
** not done
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]
** not done


!! Thomas
* refine {{smj}} proper noun lexica, cf. the propernoun-smj-lex.txt
** not this week
* work with compounding
** worked
* translate Windows installer to {{sme}} and {{smj}}
** finished with smj, don't want to think about sme
* lexicalise actio compounds
** not worked personally
* Lack of lowering before hyphen: Twol rewrite.
** not done
* Go through the Num bugs
** not done
* fix stuorra-oslolaš lower case {{o}}
** not done
* include basic numbers in the non-recursive transducers
** done
* implement discontinous case inflection for numbers
** not done
* produce correct number base forms in the analyzer
** not done
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]
** not any bugs this week


!! Tomi
* add compound stems to the PLX generation
** done (probably not finished yet)
* add closed POS and clitics to PLX generation
** done with help from __Børre__
* add derivations to the PLX generation
** not done
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]


!! Trond
* update the {{smj}} proper noun lexicon, and refine the morphological analysis,
  cf. the propernoun-smj-lex.txt (not this week)
** No.  
* fix {{sme}} texts in corpus this month
* find missing {{nob}} parallel texts in corpus, go through Saara's list
** Not done. Discussed the issue with Børre, but no.
* report conversion errors to __Saara__
** Done some, but she is so efficient, it is hard to find errors before she has fixed them
* Write twol rules for {{sme, smj}} on hyphen-triggered lowering with Thomas
** Done.
* Go through the Num bugs
** Some
* Make numeral testbed
** Some
* Get input on {{sma}} hyphenations
** Sent query, still no answer.
* include numbers in the non-recursive transducers for {{sme, smj}}
** Work underway, but the automaton may be circular.
* implement discontinous case inflection for numbers
** Started thinking, nothing done.
* produce correct base forms in the analyzer
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla].


!!!3. Documentation

Missing documentation on corpus access: no link to unrestricted part of corpus
for download, and no page describing how to apply for access to the corpus.

TODO:
* write form to request corpus user account (__Børre, Sjur, Trond__)
* document how to apply for access to closed corpus, and details on the corpus
  and its use in general (__Børre, Sjur, Trond__)
* add short description on our front page on anonymous cvs and corpus access,
  with links to relevant documentation (__Børre__)


!!!4. Corpus gathering

__Børre__ had a short look at the new {{sma}} files. Nothing else happened.

TODO:
* {{sme}} texts: no new additions, fix corpus errors during this month
  (__Børre, Trond, Saara__)
* missing {{nob}} parallel texts should be added if such holes are found
  (__Børre, Trond__)
* Go through the list of missing or errouneous {{nob}} texts, based upon
  __Saara's__ perfect list (__Børre, Trond__)
* add {{sma}} texts to the corpus repository (__Børre__)



!!!5. Corpus infrastructure

!!Alignment

__TODO:__
* go through other directories, fix parallellity information for other documents
  (__Børre__)
** not done
* when aligned, send aligned, xml {{nob}} texts to __Kristin__ (__Saara__)
** almost ready



!!Conversion issues

Character encoding errors are vanishing, thanks to __Saara.__ What is left as an
annoying problem is the pdf cutting of wordforms. 

{{{
đi iešguđet prográmmasurggiin, mat laktásit dear vvašvuhtii, eallindillái ja sám
n/depts/Mangf027.pdf.xml:    <p>Kultuvra ja dear vvašvuohta Kultuvra ja dearvvaš
jat johtui dutkama sámiid eallineavttuid ja dear vvašvuođa birra. Galgá vuoruhit
idfuolahusa doaibmaplánaruđaiguin (ja mielladear vvašvuođa buoridanplánaruđaigui
                          vuhtiiváldima dárbu ár vvoštallojuvvo dan oktavuođas,

Another error type found/still not corrected:
 ánáidgárddiide, giellaoahpahussii ja diehtojuo­ hkin-, ovddidan- ja oaivadanbar
}}}


We have two suggestions for fixing some or most of these errors:

# String replacement in the xsl files, like / vva/vva/ etc.
# testing the string output of the pdf conversion in the morphological analyser:

{{{
- test each string returned for morphological recognisability
- if string is not recognised, and the following sting is not recognised either:
  - concatenate the to unrecognised strings, and try again
  - if the concatenation is recognised, then use the concatenated string, if
    not, leave the strings as is
}}}

Pro/con:

* String replacement is safe (or can be made safe, with conservative use of
  strings), but will have less coverage (leave more errors untouched)
* It is fast, and within the setup we have. On the other side, it takes some
  time to identify the files.
* morphological testing is safer, have far better error correction performeance, 
  but will be slower. It also takes some time to set up the procedure.

__TODO:__
* report conversion errors to __Saara__ (__Trond, Steinar__)
* Have a look at the two suggestions for pdf mending above (__Saara__)

!!!6. Infrastructure

We need to test it for new corpus users, and external users in general, cf the
e-mail announcement to the NoDaLi mailing list about to be made ready.

Test tasks:
* check out anonymous cvs, and try to build the {{sme}} analyzer
* download the open section of the corpus, and try to use it as input to the
  {{sme}} disambiguator
* try to apply for a corpus user account, and when the account is created, try
  to use it to analyze some closed parts of the corpus

Instructions:
* only the ones on our web site - no interference from Børre, Trond or others:-)
* as soon as you hit a road block, write down the problem as detailed as
  possible, __then__ go and ask for help, or wait until the problem has been
  fixed

__TODO:__
* test our infrastructure and documentation - follow the documentation exactly,
  and find problem areas - report problems to __Børre__. Start: At the front
  page. (__Steinar__)
* update and fix our documentation and infrastructure as __Steinar__ finds
  problem areas (__Børre__)


!!!7. Linguistics

!!North Sámi

TODO:
* lexicalise actio compounds. Example: ''vuolggasadji''  vs. ''vuolginsadji''
  (__Thomas, Maaren, Steinar__)
* Lack of lowering before hyphen: Twol rewrite. (__Thomas, Trond__)
** done
* fix stuorra-oslolaš lower case {{o}} (__Sjur, Thomas, Trond__)


!Numbers:

We had a meeting last Friday, memo to be found
[here|/lang/sme/Numerals.html]

TODO:
* discontinous case inflection (but only for maximally three-part compound
  numerals) ({{viđain/goalmmát/logiin}} and {{guvttiin/logiin/viđain}})
  (__Thomas, Trond__)
* produce correct number base forms in the analyzer (__Thomas, Trond__)
* include numbers in the non-recursive transducers (i.e. split the recursive and 
  the non-recursive part of the numerals) (__Trond, Thomas__)
** done
* Set up test bed for numerals, test and revise (__who?__)
** test bed ready - __Trond__ did it
* Make a test bed {{make num-paradigm}} (__Trond__)
** done
* Go through the Num bugs (__Trond, Thomas, Steinar__)
* Preprocessing of ordinals at the end of sentences - reported as bug #368.
  (__Trond__)
** discussed

Classification of compounding with numerals:

{{{
Num N   ok golbmafanas
N   Num R not fanasgolbma
}}}

{{Num Num}} is a restricted type of compounding, very different from free
compounding. {{Num Num}} is also already implemented in the transducer, but left
out, due to circularity.

Written long numerals are marginal, we may consider generating some. Syntax:

{{{
* 1-9 + thousand + 1-9 + hundred +
    { 1-9 + ten +  1-9 / 1-9 + teen / 1-9 twenty + 1-9 }
}}}

From our corpus:

{{{
      1 golmma#beaivásaš
     10 golmma#geardán
      2 golmma#geardásaš
     20 golmma#gielat
      6 golmma#jagáš
      3 golmma#jahkásaš
      1 golmma#jienat
      1 golmma#juvllat
      1 golmma#lanjat
      7 golmma#lágan
      3 golmma#oasat
      2 golmma#oktasaš
      6 golmma#riika
      5 golmma#čiegat
}}}

!Hyphenation problem

TODO:

* ask Ove Lorentz to report on our {{sma}} hyphenator (__Trond__)
** Still waiting for an answer



!!Lule Sámi

TODO:
* refine {{smj}} proper noun lexica, cf. the propernoun-smj-lex.txt
  (__Thomas, Trond__)
* Lack of lowering/fronting before hyphen: Twol rewrite. (__Thomas, Trond__)
* include numbers in the non-recursive transducers (__Thomas, Trond__)
** done
* Set up a test bed for numerals, test and revise (__Trond__)


!!!8. Name lexicon infrastructure

Decisions made in Tromsø can be found in [the meeting
memo.|/admin/physical_meetings/tromso-2006-08-propnoun.html]

Postponed:
* data synchronisation between [risten.no|http://www.risten.no] and the cvs repo

TODO:
# restructure interface code for easier maintenance, coding and use
## well under way, still some work
### continued
# finish first version of the editing (__Sjur__)
# test editing of the xml files. If ok, then: (__Sjur, Thomas, Trond__)
# make terms-smX.xml <=== automatically from propernoun-sme-lex.xml (add nob as
  well) (the morphological section should be kept intact, in e.g.
  propernoun-sme-morph.txt) (__Sjur, Saara__)
# convert propernoun-($lang)-lex.txt to a derived file from common xml files
  (__Sjur, Tomi, Saara__)
# start to use the xml file as source file
# clean terms-sme.xml such that all names have the correct tag for their use
  (e.g. @type=secondary) (__Thomas, Maaren, linguists__)
# merge placenames which are errouneously in different entries: e.g. Helsinki,
  Helsingfors, Helsset (__linguists__)
# publish the name lexicon on risten.no (__Sjur__)
# add missing parallel names for placenames (__linguists__)
# add informative links between first names like Niillas and Nils
  (__linguists__)


!!!9. Spellers

!!Polderland data generation

PLX conversion made substantial progress, and we now cover most POSes, with the
exception of numerals. Also derivations are still not covered. We now need to
send off what we have to Polderland, to let them test what we have, and deliver
a first version of the spellers based on PLX code from us.

Prefixes should be added as separate entries.

__TODO:__
# add closed POS and clitics to PLX generation (__Børre, Tomi__)
## done
# add compound stems to the PLX generation (__Børre, Tomi__)
## done
# Include numerals in the speller (__Børre, Tomi__)
# add prefixes to the PLX (__Børre, Tomi__)
# add {{smj}} to PLX conversion (__Børre, Tomi__)
# add derivations to the PLX generation (__Børre, Tomi__)


!!Aspell

TODO when the major part of the PLX conversion is done:
* add Aspell/Hunspell data generation to the lexc2xspell (__Tomi__ - after the
  PLX data generation is finished)
* study Hunspell, perhaps also Soikko (__Børre, Sjur, Tomi__)



!!Testing

__TODO:__
* get an Intel Mac for testing Windows spellers (__Børre, Sjur__)
** __Sjur__ has asked __Børre__ to order two new MBP



!!Localisation

{{smj}} is now translated, and should be sent to Polderland.

TODO:
* translate Windows installer text to {{sme}} and {{smj}} (__Børre, Thomas__)
** {{smj}} done
* send {{smj}} translations to Polderland (__Børre__)



!!!10. Other

!!Corpus contracts

TODO:
* publish corpus contracts and project infra on NoDaLi-sta (__Sjur__)
** wrote most of the letters, but found some holes (discussed above)


!!Bug fixing

__55__ open Divvun/Disamb bugs, and __23__ risten.no bugs


!!!11. Next meeting, closing

The next meeting is 29.1.2007, 09:30 Norwegian time.

The meeting was closed at 10:53.

!!!Appendix - task lists for the next week

!! Boerre

* send {{smj}} translations to Polderland
* write form to request corpus user account
* document how to apply for access to closed corpus, and details on the corpus
  and its use in general
* add short description on our front page on anonymous cvs and corpus access,
  with links to relevant documentation
* update and fix our documentation and infrastructure as __Steinar__ finds
  problem areas
* continue work on script for automatic testing of the spell checker in Word
* fix {{sme}} texts in corpus this month
* find missing {{nob}} parallel texts in corpus
* translate Windows installer text to {{sme}}
* work on the Polderland data generation (PLX format conversion)
** Concentrate on compounding
* go through other directories, fix parallellity information for other documents
* add {{sma}} texts to the corpus repository
* order Intel Macs
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]


!! Maaren

* tasks according to Thomas

!! Saara

* fix {{sme}} texts in corpus this month
* send aligned, xml {{nob}} texts to __Kristen__
* fix problems with xml2lexc if needed
* check the problem with pdf-conversion cutting wordforms.
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]


!! Sjur

* name lexicon:
** restructure interface code for easier maintenance, coding and use
** refactor the rest of the SD-terms editor code
** implement missing propnouns editing functions
** implement improvements decided upon in Tromsø
* hire linguist and programmer
* publish corpus contracts and project infra on NoDaLi-sta
* fix stuorra-oslolaš lower case {{o}}
* write form to request corpus user account
* document how to apply for access to closed corpus, and details on the corpus
  and its use in general
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]


!! Steinar

* test our infrastructure and documentation - follow the documentation exactly,
  and find problem areas - report problems to __Børre__. Start: At the front
  page.
* Complete the semantic sets in sme-dis.rle
* missing lists
* report conversion errors to __Saara__
* Look at the actio compound issue when adding from missing lists
* lexicalise actio compounds. Example: ''vuolggasadji''  vs. ''vuolginsadji''
* Go through the Num bugs
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]


!! Thomas

* refine {{smj}} proper noun lexica, cf. the propernoun-smj-lex.txt 
* work with compounding
* lexicalise actio compounds
* Lack of lowering before hyphen: Twol rewrite.
* Go through the Num bugs
* fix stuorra-oslolaš lower case {{o}}
* implement discontinous case inflection for numbers
* produce correct number base forms in the analyzer
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]


!! Tomi

* add compound stems to the PLX generation
* include numerals in the speller
* add prefixes to the PLX
* add {{smj}} to PLX conversion
* add derivations to the PLX generation
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]


!! Trond

* update the {{smj}} proper noun lexicon, and refine the morphological analysis,
  cf. the propernoun-smj-lex.txt
* fix {{sme}} texts in corpus this month
* find missing {{nob}} parallel texts in corpus, go through Saara's list
* report conversion errors to __Saara__
* Go through the Num bugs
* Make numeral testbed for smj as well
* Get input on {{sma}} hyphenations
* implement discontinous case inflection for numbers
* produce correct number base forms in the analyzer
* write form to request corpus user account
* document how to apply for access to closed corpus, and details on the corpus
  and its use in general
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla].
