# Meeting setup

* Date: 17.12.2007
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Internet
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat/Skype

# Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from last week
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. name lexicon infrastructure
1. Spellers
1. Other issues
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 12:34.

Present: **Børre, Ilona, Sjur, Thomas**

Absent: **Risten, Per-Eric, Trond, Tomi**

Agenda accepted as is.

# 2. Updated task status since last meeting

## Børre
* finalise InDesign hyphenator
    - not done
* new/updated front page (old front page to history page)
    - done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Ilona
* lexicalise `smj` missing words.
    - Not this week anymore, but this is never done.
* Help Trond with the `smj` dictionary.
    - Done?
* Translation, language checking.
    - Done
* Typo 494, sme
    - fixed the typos list in false negatives.

## Maaren
* lexicalise actio compounds

## Per-Eric
* check some unusual and missing words from the last Olavi missing list 071123.txt which still are not lexicalised
    - started with it
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - worked with it

## Risten
* Print 50 CDs, take them to Oslo as backup
    - done

## Saara
* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* Set up ways of adding meta-information for proofing correct corpus docs
  (source info, used in testing or not, added to lexicon or not)
* add nested error markup to xml conversion
* discuss more parallel texts

## Sjur
* document Windows CD installation work-around
    - done
* finalise InDesign hyphenator
    - not done
* update usage and installation documentation
    - done
* new/updated front page (old front page to history page)
    - done
* press release
    - done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - done

## Thomas
* `sme->smj` lexicon conversion to build bilingual lexicon resources
    - not any this week
* test hyphenation
    - not any this week
* analyse hyphenation test results
    - not any this week
* look at test cases still not behaving properly
    - worked some
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - worked some

## Tomi
* Hunspell lexicon conversion
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond
* `sme->smj` lexicon conversion to build bilingual lexicon resources
    - Worked on this issues, better conversion now, errors corrected.
* analyse hyphenation test results
    - Not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
    - Not done

# 3. Documentation

InDesign documentation is needed.

**TODO:**
* update InDesign documentation (**Børre, Sjur**)
* translate InDesign documentation (**Thomas, Sjur, Ilona**)
* proofread the translated/written documentation (**Børre, Per-Eric, Tomi**)

# 4. Corpus infrastructure

Nothing.

# 5. Infrastructure

**TODO:**
* add Jabber account in iChat (**all**)

# 6. Linguistics

## North Sámi

Hyphenation bugs found in Polderland code, update expected this week, should fix
everything.

**Ilona** fixed the `sme` false negatives in bug 494.

## Lule Sámi

Hyphenation: same as for `sme`.

**TODO:**
* `sme->smj` lexicon conversion to build bilingual lexicon resources, and
  increase `smj` coverage (**Trond, Thomas, Svenne**). Add the words.

# 7. Name lexicon infrastructure

Delayed till Divvun2 (or after release of Divvun1).

Decisions made in Tromsø can be found in [this meeting
memo.|/admin/physical_meetings/tromso-2006-08-propnoun.html]

**TODO:**
1. fix bugs in lexc2xml; add comments to the log element (**Saara**)
1. finish first version of the editing (**Sjur**)
1. test editing of the xml files. If ok, then: (**Sjur, Thomas, Trond**)
1. make terms-smX.xml <=== automatically from propernoun-sme-lex.xml (add nob as
  well) (the morphological section should be kept intact, in e.g.
  propernoun-sme-morph.txt) (**Sjur, Saara**)
1. convert propernoun-($lang)-lex.txt to a derived file from common xml files
  (**Sjur, Tomi, Saara**)
1. implement data synchronisation between [risten.no](http://www.risten.no) and
   the cvs repo, and possibly other servers (ie the G5 as an alternative server
   to the public risten.no - it might be faster and better suited than the
   official one; also local installations could be treated the same way)
1. start to use the xml file as source file
1. clean terms-sme.xml such that all names have the correct tag for their use
  (e.g. @type=secondary) (**Thomas, Maaren, linguists**)
1. merge placenames which are errouneously in different entries: e.g. Helsinki,
  Helsingfors, Helsset (**linguists**)
1. publish the name lexicon on risten.no (**Sjur**)
1. add missing parallel names for placenames (**linguists**)
1. add informative links between first names like Niillas and Nils
  (**linguists**)

# 8. Proofing tools

## Hunspell

Proper nouns not yet working, and they do not contain anything to clearly
identify the end of the stem. This makes it harder to generate proper HUNSPELL
entries.

TODO:
* Hunspell lexicon conversion (**Tomi, Børre**)

## Testing

### Spelling Error Markup

This will wait till after the release.

**TODO:**
* Set up ways of adding meta-information (source info, used in testing or not,
  added to lexicon or not) (**Saara**)
* move **Steinar's** error markup in the xml files to (a copy of) the original
  (**Børre, Kimme**)
* add nested error markup to xml conversion (**Saara**)
* test new and nested error markup (**Sjur**)

### Automated testing

Paradigm testing not yet working as expected.

**TODO:**
* improve hyphenation testing (**Sjur**)
* fix paradigm testing (**Sjur**)

### MS Office

Proofing tools do not work in Office 2003 when language is set to North Sámi
(Finland/Sweden), and hyphenation doesn't work in Office 2007 under the same
circumstances. This is reported to Polderland, and a fix is expected soon.

## Lexicon conversion to the PLX format

Open issues based on test results:

sámi-dáru - not accepted => Gen+hyph compound, is not allowed with hyphen. We
can allow such compounds without too much overgeneration by adding the hyphen to
the last part, ie *-dáru* in the PLX entry. => Bugzilla as feature request.

### smj
* 419 - fixed
* 518 - regression - Fuoskok = pl+clitic as well as derivation = won't fix
* 575 - fixed - no double hyphens
* 584 - fixed
* 589 - fixed
* 596 - C-giella

### sme
* 425 - roman number - will not be fixed in 1.0 release
* 518 - regression - plural same as derivation, won't fix
* 588 - regression - *r.* accepted as final part
    - **Tomi** knows where is the problem, but because verb compilation takes much
   time, haven't tackled it yet
* 592 - fixed
* 593 - missing words in beta2, still a few
* 595 - prefix+name wihtout hyphen (*ovdaLot* instead of *ovda-Lot*)

**TODO:**
* look at test cases still not behaving properly (**Thomas, Tomi**)

## InDesign tools

Almost finished, found a bug (reported to Polderland).

**TODO:**
* improve hyphenation testing (**Sjur**)
* upload (**Sjur**)
* documentation (**Børre, Sjur**)

## Hyphenators

Waiting for the last bug fixes from Polderland.

## Final release

Released!

## Update

* update the list of changes/fixes (**Børre**)
* update the front page (**Sjur, all**)
* include latest fixes, update from Polderland (**Sjur, Tomi**)
* update list of installed files (**Sjur, Børre**)

# 9. Other

## Christmas vacation

|   who     | when
| --- | ---
|  Børre    | away 20th, 21st, working from home on 27th, 28th
|  Ilona    | Not working: 22.-26.12. and 31.12.-4.1. (well, next year at all? My contract ends at 31.12.)
|  Per-Eric | work some of the days in christmas, no vacation
|  Sjur     | 22-1, possibly working 27-28
|  Thomas   | 21-28
|  Tomi     | don't know yet, work some days
|  Trond    | 24.12, 31.12. Work some of the days. Also prepare lectures at home...

## Corpus contracts

Delayed till after final release.

TODO:
* publish corpus contracts and project infra as open-source on NoDaLi-sta
  (**Sjur**)

## Bug fixing

When fixing bugs, record the version number containing the fix in the Bugzilla
bug report, such that for each bug, we know exactly when it should have been
fixed, in what file(s) and what version.

**83** open Divvun/Disamb bugs (**45** of these 83 are speller-related bugs,
**38** are other bugs), and **23** risten.no bugs

# 10. Next meeting, closing

The next meeting is 7.1.2008, 09:30 Norwegian time.

The meeting was closed at 13:41.

# Appendix - task lists for the next week

## Boerre

* finalise InDesign hyphenator
* new/updated front page (old front page to history page)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Ilona

* Continue the bug 494
* Still something to translate/proofread in Finnish?

## Maaren
* lexicalise actio compounds

## Per-Eric

* check some unusual and missing words from the last Olavi missing list 071123.txt which still are not lexicalised
* proofread the translated/written documentation
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Risten

* Print 50 CDs, take them to Oslo as backup

## Saara

* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* Set up ways of adding meta-information for proofing correct corpus docs
  (source info, used in testing or not, added to lexicon or not)
* add nested error markup to xml conversion
* discuss more parallel texts

## Sjur

* document Windows CD installation work-around
* finalise InDesign hyphenator
* update usage and installation documentation
* new/updated front page (old front page to history page)
* press release
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Thomas

* translate InDesign documentation
* `sme->smj` lexicon conversion to build bilingual lexicon resources
* test hyphenation
* analyse hyphenation test results
* look at test cases still not behaving properly
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Tomi

* Hunspell lexicon conversion
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond

* `sme->smj` lexicon conversion to build bilingual lexicon resources
* analyse hyphenation test results
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
