# Meeting setup

* Date: 10.04.2007
* Time: 10.30 Norw. time
* Place: Internet
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat

# Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from last week
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. name lexicon infrastructure
1. Spellers
1. Other issues
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 10:51.

Present: **Børre, Maaren, Sjur, Steinar, Thomas, Tomi**

Absent: **Saara, Trond**

Agenda accepted as is.

# 2. Updated task status since last meeting

##  Børre
* update and fix our documentation and infrastructure as **Steinar** finds
  problem areas - low priority
    - not done
* find missing `nob` parallel texts in corpus
    - not done
* improve number PLX conversion
    - not done
* add `sma` texts to the corpus repository
    - not done
* improve automatic alignment process
    - Had some discussions with **Trond**. We found out that the anchor list must
   be improved. The other part of the problem is that the webapplication
   that shows the aligned documents, shows the wrong alignment. This is
   something that **Lars Nygård** will have to fix.
* collect a list of PR recipients, forward to Berit Karen Paulsen
    - not done
* run all known spelling errors in the corpus through the speller
    - not done
* add extraction of all known spelling errors in the regular corpus (not the
  `prooftest` corpus), and check that they are properly corrected
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - not done
* other:
    - built and uploaded fink containing gobby for intel macs. began work on ppc
   version
    - made scripts to download articles from minaigi.no and added them to the
   prooftest part of our repository

##  Maaren
* lexicalise actio compounds
**trying to do this
* Manually mark speller test documents for typos
    - started working

##  Saara
* prepare more files for manual alignment
    - in progress
* mark-up the added speller test texts, using our existing xml format
    - done
* improve cgi-bin scripts
    - add new features to the paradigm generator
        - not done
* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
    - started discussion in newsgroup
* continue with speller test data
    - done
* compilation of verb lists
    - not done
* speed in smj conversion
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* finish press release for the beta
    - not yet
* collect a list of PR recipients
    - not yet
* improve version info in the speller lexicons
    - not yet
* run all known spelling errors in the corpus through the speller
    - not yet
* document the AppleScript testing tool
    - not yet
* write tools for statistical analysis of test results
    - done
* integrate regression self tests with the make file
    - not yet
* make improved `smj` speller (incl. derivations and compounds)
    - worked a lot on this - we generate 66 Gb(!) of data, and in the end the
   compilation failed due to wrong sorting. We need to look carefully at
   possible overgeneration.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Steinar
* Beta testing: Align manually (shorter texts)
* Manually mark speller test texts for typos (making them into gold standards),
  add the texts to the orig/catalogue
    - Started work, added two XML texts (correct.xml)
* Complete the semantic sets in sme-dis.rle
    - no work this week
* missing list
    - added terminology from missing sami linguistics and literature lists
* Look at the actio compound issue when adding from missing lists
    - not done
* Align corpus manually
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Thomas
* work with compounding
    - working hard
* Lack of lowering before hyphen: Twol rewrite.
    - nothing this week
* translate beta release docs to `sme` and `smj`
    - not done
* Add potential speller test texts
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - participated

##  Tomi
* make improved `smj` speller (incl. derivations and compounds)
    - worked on it
* make PLX conversion test sample; add conversion testing to the make file
* improve number PLX conversion
* improve prefix and middle-noun PLX conversion
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Trond
* Test the beta versions
* Work on the parallel corpus issues
    - Discuss with Anders
    - Work on the aligner with (**Børre**)
    - fix `sme` texts in corpus this month
    - find missing `nob` parallel texts in corpus, go through Saara's list
* Postpone these tasks to after the beta:
    - update the `smj` proper noun lexicon, and refine the morphological
   analysis, cf. the propernoun-smj-lex.txt
    - Go through the Num bugs
* Improve automatic alignment process
* Align corpus manually
* Add potential speller test texts
* collect a list of PR recipients
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).

# 3. Documentation

The open documentation issues fall into these three categories:
* Beta documentation for testers
* Documentation for the online corpora
* General documentation improvement after Steinar's test (for open-source
  release)

TODO:
* write form to request corpus user account (**Børre, Sjur, Trond**)
    - delayed till after the beta release
* document how to apply for access to closed corpus, and details on the corpus
  and its use in general (**Børre, Sjur, Trond**)
    - delayed till after the beta release
* correct and improve it based on feedback from **Steinar** (**Børre**)
    - low priority
* beta documentation (see separate beta section below)

# 4. Corpus gathering

**Børre** has added texts from **Min Áigi** to the prooftest corpus dir.

TODO:
* `sme` texts: no new additions, fix corpus errors during this month
  (**Børre, Trond, Saara**)
* missing `nob` parallel texts should be added if such holes are found
  (**Børre, Trond**)
* Go through the list of missing or errouneous `nob` texts, based upon
  **Saara's** perfect list (**Børre, Trond**)
* add `sma` texts to the corpus repository (**Børre**)

# 5. Corpus infrastructure

## Alignment

**TODO**
* go through other directories (nob dicrectories, sd directories), fix
  parallellity information for other documents (2 hours)
  (**Børre**)
* Improve the automatic process:
    - Improve the anchor list and realign (**Trond, Børre**)
    - Only adding words does not improve alignment, you have to consider the format
   as well. If you cut with star e.g guo@ too early, wrong word can be selected.
    - The documents have still some formatting issues which cause trouble in
   alignment. (In some documents tables are included to the text, some not,
   etc.)
    - Test and improve settings in the aligner
* Align manually (**Trond, Steinar**) (especially shorter terminological texts)
  good idea. **Saara** will look for troublesome texts and prepare them for
  manual alignment.

# 6. Infrastructure

**TODO:**
* update and fix our documentation and infrastructure as **Steinar** finds
  problem areas (**Børre**)

# 7. Linguistics

## North Sámi

TODO:
* lexicalise actio compounds. Example: *vuolggasadji*  vs. *vuolginsadji*
  (**Maaren**)
* fix stuorra-oslolaš lower case `o` (**Sjur, Thomas, Trond**)
    - postponed till after the public beta

## Lule Sámi

TODO:
* refine `smj` proper noun lexica, cf. the propernoun-smj-lex.txt
  (**Thomas, Trond**)

# 8. Name lexicon infrastructure

Decisions made in Tromsø can be found in [this meeting
memo.|/admin/physical_meetings/tromso-2006-08-propnoun.html]

**TODO:**
1. fix bugs in lexc2xml; add comments to the log element (**Saara**)
1. finish first version of the editing (**Sjur**)
1. test editing of the xml files. If ok, then: (**Sjur, Thomas, Trond**)
1. make terms-smX.xml <=== automatically from propernoun-sme-lex.xml (add nob as
  well) (the morphological section should be kept intact, in e.g.
  propernoun-sme-morph.txt) (**Sjur, Saara**)
1. convert propernoun-($lang)-lex.txt to a derived file from common xml files
  (**Sjur, Tomi, Saara**)
1. implement data synchronisation between [risten.no](http://www.risten.no) and
   the cvs repo, and possibly other servers (ie the G5 as an alternative server
   to the public risten.no - it might be faster and better suited than the
   official one; also local installations could be treated the same way)
1. start to use the xml file as source file
1. clean terms-sme.xml such that all names have the correct tag for their use
  (e.g. @type=secondary) (**Thomas, Maaren, linguists**)
1. merge placenames which are errouneously in different entries: e.g. Helsinki,
  Helsingfors, Helsset (**linguists**)
1. publish the name lexicon on risten.no (**Sjur**)
1. add missing parallel names for placenames (**linguists**)
1. add informative links between first names like Niillas and Nils
  (**linguists**)

# 9. Spellers

## OOo speller(s)

TODO after the MS Office Beta is delivered:
* add Hunspell data generation to the lexc2xspell (**Tomi** - after the
  PLX data generation is finished)
* study the Hunspell formalism in detail (**Børre, Sjur, Tomi**)

## Testing

### Spelling Error Markup

Procedure for marking up:

1. pick a file in:
  `/home/steinarn/gt/sme/zcorp/prooftest/bound/sme/news/MinAigi/`, e.g.:
  `index2.php_id_647.html.xml`
1. rename it from `.xml` to `.correct.xml`:
  `index2.php_id_647.html.correct.xml`
1. copy to your own computer
1. open in SEE or XMLEditor
1. add manual markup according to the established convention
1. when done, copy the file back to victorio - see dir structure below

Directory structure and file locations for manually corrected files:

```
1  prooftest/.../orig/file.html      loading
1  prooftest/.../orig/file.html.xsl  converting
2  prooftest/.../bound/file.html.xml to this file, copying back to orig as 3a
3a prooftest/.../orig/file.html.correct.xml speling§spelling  working on this
   manually, using RCS to check in each generation of manual markup
3b prooftest/.../bound/file.html.xml <error corr="spelling">speling</error>
```

- missing: last changes in eror$error => <error> conversion, + last ccat option

**TODO:**
* Manually mark test texts for typos (making them into gold standards)
  (**Steinar**)
    - `erorr§errors`
    - when correcting to multiple strings: `erorr.Og§(error. Og)`
        - update correction markup xml conversion to handle the second case
    (**Saara**)
* change `ccat` to handle error/correction markup (**Tomi**)
    - extract the whole text, both the original text and their corrections, in a
   tab separated file: `erorr<TAB>correction` - just as typos.txt. Used for
   another type of speller testing. `correction` should be an emtpy string if
   there is no correction.
        - not done
* Set up ways of adding meta-information (source info, used in testing or not,
  added to lexicon or not)
    - add the wanted xml elements to the XSL header (**Saara**) (source info is
   the same as for regular docs):
        - outworned (ie not suitable for speller testing any more, only for regression
    testing)
        - lexicalised (all unknown, correctly spelled words added to lexicon)
* Conduct tests on new beta versions on the basis of the unspoiled gold standard
  documents (**whoever has time**), and fill in data from testing (the testers:
  **who?**)
* alternatively: make test scripts that will run the tests automatically,
  collect the numbers, and transform them into test results (**Sjur**)
* include the ones already tested in the `testing/` catalogue
* test each version before beta release

### Testing tools

A first version of statistics and test result processing is finished and
working. It doesn't work with our current version of Forrest (but works ok with
the standard Forrest version), and it is presently targeted at `typos.txt`
analysis. Thus, further improvements are needed. But already this version gives
us valuable feedback on areas for improvements.

Test output can temporarily be found on
[http://88.114.121.148:8888/doc/proof/spelling/testing/spelltest-typos-plx-sme_20070404.html]
(Sjur's computer - **NB!** The IP number will change! - but it will probably
stay the same for the rest of the week)

**TODO:**
* document the AppleScript testing tool (**Sjur**)
* write tools for statistical analysis of test results (**Sjur**)
    - started, **Saara** continued, **Sjur** will continue with Forrest integration
        - done first version, see link above.
* improve speller test bench (**Sjur**)

### Regression tests

**TODO:**
* add extraction of all known spelling errors in the corpus (not the
  `prooftest` corpus), and check that they are properly corrected
  (**Børre, Sjur**)
    - `ccat` now ready, it should be integrated in the Makefile (**Sjur, Tomi**)
* test the `typos.txt` list, and check that all entries are properly corrected
  (**Børre, Sjur**)
* consider how to do a regression **self-test**, ie, how to test the full
  wordlist (**Børre, Sjur**)
    - extract all the base forms in the lexicon, and run them through the speller
    - extract all SUB-marked entries, and run them through the lexicon
        - integrate these in the make file (**Sjur**)

## Localisation

We need to translate the info added to our front page (and a separate page)
regarding the beta release. Also the press release needs to be translated.

TODO:
* translate beta release docs to `sme` (**Thomas**)
* translate beta release docs to `smj` (**Thomas**)

## Lexicon conversion to the PLX format

Postverbal clitics

### Numbers

Numbers as figures need to be generated up front. The output should be:

```
1	UILH
2	UILH
...
1000000 	UILH
```

**TODO:**
* add numbers as figures to the PLX sources (**Børre**)

### Compounding restrictions

How to include compounding restriction comment tags in the transducers:
```
giv0ri:giv'ri ALBMI ; !+SgNomCmp +SgGenCmp +PlGenCmp
=> (using a perl script or similar)
+SgNomCmp+SgGenCmp+PlGenCmpgiv0ri:giv'ri ALBMI ; !
```

**TODO:**
1. improve prefix conversion to PLX (**Tomi**)
1. improve middle noun conversion to PLX (**Tomi**)
1. improve noun + adjective PLX conversion: (**Tomi**)
    1. compounding stems - how do we generate them? Using the java client?
    `+SgNomCmp+Cmpnd` = `sáme–`, should give the correct compounding stem,
    shouldn't it? We want to **optionally** go from: `sáme-	NLI` to
    `sáme	NL`: `-	NLI (->) 	NL`, which means we should be able to
    extract correct compounding stems using xfst methods only.
    1. compounding tags - we need to obey them when making the transducers.
    Suggestion - see above.
1. add propernouns to xfst-based conversion
1. make conversion test sample; add conversion testing to the make file
  (**Tomi**)
1. improve number conversion (**Børre, Tomi**)
1. run xfst-based PLX conversion on victorio, make the result available on our
  public server (**Saara, Sjur**)

## Public Beta release

Due to the problems with generating the PLX files discussed above, we need to
move the release date further. Mid-April, before the "physical" meeting.

**DONE:**
* delivered PLX data of `sme` and `smj` including compounding
* translated Windows installer to `sme` and `smj`
* installed PLX compiler in G5 at `/usr/local/bin/mklex` (one version for
  `sme` and one for `smj`)
* added resources needed for compiling PLX lexicons to our cvs repo
* tested the beta drop from Polderland - good we did, it is absolutely
  unacceptable (our responsibiliby - only linguistic errors (poor coverage)
  found so far)
* add compilation of MS Office spellers part of the Makefile
* install Windows and MS Office; test tools on Windows

**TODO:**
* improved `smj` speller (incl. derivations and compounds) (**Sjur, Tomi**)
* add numbers, compound restrictions to `sme` speller if time permits
  (**Børre, Tomi**)
* add names to `smj` speller (**Sjur**)
* finish press release (**Sjur**)
* add info to front page (incl. download links) (**Børre**)
* write separate page with detailed info (incl. download links) (**Børre**)
* translate press release, web pages (**Børre, Thomas, whoever**)
* collect a list of PR recipients, forward to Berit Karen Paulsen
  (**Børre, Sjur, Trond**)
* test speller installers on Windows and Mac (**Børre**)
* update installer packages with latest speller lexicon (**Børre, Sjur**)

## Version identification of speller lexicons

The date stamp isn't automatically updated, it needs to be.

**TODO:**
* make the date stamp reflect the compilation date automatically (**Sjur**)

# 10. Other

## Project meeting IRL

The planned gathering will have to be on 16.-20.4., in **Guovdageaidnu.** All of
Divvun should participate, and some from the UiTø project will as well.

## Corpus contracts

TODO:
* publish corpus contracts and project infra as open-source on NoDaLi-sta
  (**Sjur**)
    - **delayed** until the public beta is out the door

## Bug fixing

**51** open Divvun/Disamb bugs, and **23** risten.no bugs

## New team member

Per-Eric Kuoljok started working in the Divvun project April 1. He needs to get
all accounts and working equipments in place before we meet in Kautokeino April
16.

**TODO:**
* set up computer (**Børre, Sjur**)
* install all required software (**Børre, Sjur**)
* set up all user accounts (**Sjur, Trond**)

# 11. Next meeting, closing

The next meeting is 23.4.2007, 09:30 Norwegian time.

The meeting was closed at 11:34.

# Appendix - task lists for the next week

##  Boerre

* update and fix our documentation and infrastructure as **Steinar** finds
  problem areas - low priority
* find missing `nob` parallel texts in corpus
* improve number PLX conversion
* add `sma` texts to the corpus repository
* improve automatic alignment process
* collect a list of PR recipients, forward to Berit Karen Paulsen
* run all known spelling errors in the corpus through the speller
* add extraction of all known spelling errors in the regular corpus (not the
  `prooftest` corpus), and check that they are properly corrected
* test speller installers on Windows and Mac
* set up Per-Eric's computer
* install all required software on Per-Eric's computer
* update installer packages with latest speller lexicon
* add numbers, compound restrictions to both spellers if time permits
* add numbers as figures to the PLX sources
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Maaren

* lexicalise actio compounds
* Manually mark speller test documents for typos

##  Saara

* prepare more files for manual alignment
* improve cgi-bin scripts
    - add new features to the paradigm generator
* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* compilation of verb lists
* speed in smj conversion
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur

* finish press release for the beta
* collect a list of PR recipients
* make the version info date stamp reflect the compilation date automatically
* run all known spelling errors in the corpus through the speller
* document the AppleScript testing tool
* integrate regression self tests with the make file
* make improved `smj` speller (incl. derivations and compounds)
* set up Per-Eric's computer
* install all required software on Per-Eric's computer
* set up all user accounts for Per-Eric
* improve speller test bench
* add names to `smj` speller
* update installer packages with latest speller lexicon
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Steinar

* Beta testing: Align manually (shorter texts)
* Manually mark speller test texts for typos (making them into gold standards),
  add the texts to the orig/catalogue
* Complete the semantic sets in sme-dis.rle
* missing lists
* Look at the actio compound issue when adding from missing lists
* Align corpus manually
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Thomas

* work with compounding
* Lack of lowering before hyphen: Twol rewrite.
* translate beta release docs to `sme` and `smj`
* Add potential speller test texts
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Tomi

* make improved `smj` speller (incl. derivations and compounds)
* add numbers, compound restrictions to both spellers if time permits
* make PLX conversion test sample; add conversion testing to the make file
* improve number PLX conversion
* improve prefix and middle-noun PLX conversion
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Trond

* Test the beta versions
* Work on the parallel corpus issues
    - Discuss with Anders
    - Work on the aligner with (**Børre**)
    - fix `sme` texts in corpus this month
    - find missing `nob` parallel texts in corpus, go through Saara's list
* Postpone these tasks to after the beta:
    - update the `smj` proper noun lexicon, and refine the morphological
   analysis, cf. the propernoun-smj-lex.txt
    - Go through the Num bugs
* Improve automatic alignment process
* Align corpus manually
* Add potential speller test texts
* collect a list of PR recipients
* set up all user accounts for Per-Eric
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
