# Meeting setup

* Date: 31.3.2008
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Internet
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat/Skype

# Agenda

Cf. one of the following, depending on context:
* the upper bar of the SEE window (provided you use the JSPWiki syntax mode)
* the TOC in Forrest-rendered output, like HTML and PDF

# Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 10:16.

Present: **Børre, Per-Eric, Sjur, Thomas, Trond**

Absent: **Maaren, Lene, Tomi**

Agenda accepted as is.

# Updated task status since last meeting

## Børre
* gather `sma` texts
* Hunspell lexicon conversion
* InDesign documentation
* update the *Changes* document
* prepare migration to svn (with **Sjur, Trond**)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Lene
* Ped project
* Add a flag !^P^ for forms to be excluded from ped. speller

## Maaren
* Put the list of possible `sma` corpus sources into a document

## Per-Eric
* keep the contact with Kurt Tores family about his texts.
    - Not heard anything from them
* try to find other authors who have `smj` texts digitaly, send contracts to
  them
* Work with missing list from Tjaktjalasta, Lars-Matto Tuolja.
    - Nothing done
* Work with missing list from texts written by Sigga Tuolja Sandström.
    - Nothing done
* Keep the contact with Ulf-Stefan Winka who has many more smj texts to add.
    - Keeping the contact
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - Nothing done

## Saara
* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* Set up ways of adding meta-information for proofing correct corpus docs
  (source info, used in testing or not, added to lexicon or not)
* discuss more parallel texts

## Sjur
* gather `sma` texts
    - nothing new
* name db/risten.no
    - nothing new
* make an improved `sma` project plan
    - nothing new
* publish corpus contracts and project infra as open-source on NoDaLi-sta
    - nothing new
* prepare migration to svn (**Børre, Trond**)
    - nothing new
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
* other things:
    - cleaning up papers and reiserekningshelvetet

## Thomas
* look at test cases still not behaving properly
    - not any this week
* try to fix 636
    - done with a little help from my friends
* Add a flag !^P^ for forms to be excluded from ped. speller
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - some done

## Tomi
* Hunspell lexicon conversion
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
* fix double hyphen bugs
* compile new speller lexicons
* Make a pedagogical speller (after MA thesis is delivered)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond
* Work on `sma` analyser and visl integration
    - Not done
* try to fix 636
    - Done, fixed.
* Prepare svn migration (with **Sjur, Børre**)
    - Have read about the topic, that's all.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
    - The assigned one, at least.

# Pedagogical software online

**TODO:**
* get an easy-to-remember URL (**UiT/IT**)
* More thorough skin, layout, ... (**External person within the Ped team**,
  **Internal forrest expert**) This we will postpone until later
* Make a pedagogical speller (**Tomi** when finished with his MA thesis)
    - Add a flag !^P^ for forms to be excluded (**Thomas, Lene**)
    - Turn off peripheral compounds (numbers, acros, perhaps names)
    - Increase editing distance by one for suggestions? Only possible with limited
   compounding

# Documentation

**TODO:**
* start to reorganise the documentation (**Børre, Sjur, Trond**)

# Corpus gathering

**TODO:**
* follow-up on the `smj` texts from **Kurt Tore** (**Per-Eric**)
* get texts from **Sigga Tuolja Sandstrøm**, possibly through
  **Ulf-Stefan Winka**
  (contract is ok now) (**Per-Eric**)
* other contacts: Nord-Salten avis, Børge Strandskog, Lena Davidsson daughter to
  Lars-Matto Tuolja
* gather `sma` texts (**Børre, Sjur, Trond, Joseph**)
* Put the list of possible corpus sources into a document
  `gt/doc/lang/sma/sma-corpus-plan.jspwiki` (**Maaren**)
* give contract with blank fields to **Per-Eric** (**Børre**)

# Future plans, directions and ideas

See a separate document in `plan/strat/5year.jspwiki`.

# Infrastructure

To accomodate future enhancements in different directions:
1. migrate to svn
1. merge gt, kt and st into one, probably after the svn move
1. more modularised make / build infra (prepare for smn, sms, sjd, others)
1. close certain parts of the code repository (requires svn)
1. set up the Leopard Server features for collaborative support:
    1. permanent chat rooms
    1. stored (and indexed) chat transcripts of the chat rooms
    1. iCal server / group calendars
    1. wiki
1. wiki? (is part of Leopard Server) or other web-based documentation
1. improve Forrest stability and i18n support
1. reorganise the documentation content:
    1. differ between target groups
    1. get better grouping
    1. decide what to write in forrest and what in wiki
   (cf. Apertium for a similar split)
    1. update/add missing parts
1. migrate lexicons to XML, splitting the task
    1. Name lexica (the Name project)
    1. Dictionaries (already in XML, task is to integrate them)
    1. Open POSes (Komi as a test case)
1. change the look of the documentation web
1. sfst? Both as replacement for xfst and for hunspell/open-source proofing tools
1. investigate the NSIS installer, potentially replacing the InstallShield
  package from Polderland
1. corpus content moved to Max Planck repositories?

**TODO:**
* add Jabber account in iChat
    - check that all accounts are ready for iChat on the G5 (**Børre**)
    - UiT: Lene, Kimme, Saara (**Trond**)
    - SD: Svenne, Joseph (**Sjur**)
* prepare migration to svn (**Børre, Sjur, Trond**)

# Linguistics

## North Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

## Lule Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

**TODO:**
* `sme->smj` lexicon conversion to build bilingual lexicon resources, and
  increase `smj` coverage (**Trond, Svenne**).
* Add the words when all words are ready.

## South Sámi

Nothing new.

# Name lexicon infrastructure

**TODO:**
1. fix i18n bug in risten.no/G5 (so they will work without the proper locale
  request) (**Sjur**)
    1. it works ok locally, set-up / config needs to be checked on the G5; probably
   easy to fix
        1. it works the same both locally and on the G5, relates to i18n setup in
    forrest
1. fix bugs in lexc2xml; add comments to the log element (**Saara**)
1. finish first version of the editing (**Sjur**)
1. test editing of the xml files. If ok, then: (**Sjur, Thomas, Trond**)
1. make terms-smX.xml <=== automatically from propernoun-sme-lex.xml (add nob as
  well) (the morphological section should be kept intact, in e.g.
  propernoun-sme-morph.txt) (**Sjur, Saara**)
1. convert propernoun-($lang)-lex.txt to a derived file from common xml files
  (**Sjur, Tomi, Saara**)
1. implement data synchronisation between [risten.no](http://www.risten.no) and
   the cvs repo, and possibly other servers (ie the G5 as an alternative server
   to the public risten.no - it might be faster and better suited than the
   official one; also local installations could be treated the same way)
1. start to use the xml file as source file
1. clean terms-sme.xml such that all names have the correct tag for their use
  (e.g. @type=secondary) (**Thomas, Maaren, linguists**)
1. merge placenames which are errouneously in different entries: e.g. Helsinki,
  Helsingfors, Helsset (**linguists**)
1. publish the name lexicon on risten.no (**Sjur**)
1. add missing parallel names for placenames (**linguists**)
1. add informative links between first names like Niillas and Nils
  (**linguists**)

# Proofing tools

## Hunspell

OOo 2.4 is out, with support for the Sámi languages. And Skolelinux would like
to add support for Sámi in the next Debian release, which implies a deadline
around the beginning of May for us.

To ease conversion to Hunspell and similar formats, it would be extremely useful
to add a stem border mark to all languages and all inflected words. Tasks involved:
1. decide which markers to use for derivations and inflections (pot. also
  prefixes and suffixes)
1. Decide where to put the suffix boundaries, On parent lexicon or on child lexicon;
  only on stem-suffix border, or also on suffix-suffix-border
1. Add the boundaries to lexc (already done for sme derivations and proper names)
1. Do the boundaries in twol compulsatory when called for

**Børre** has made what could be called the first beta of the Hunspell speller
for `sme`. We now need to test and debug, and at the same time make `smj`
ready for beta as well. We'll try to reach the May deadline with a reasonably good beta.

**TODO:**
1. test the latest hunspell lexicon (**Sjur**)
1. add `smj` to the soup, make sure it works roughly as good as `sme`
  (**Børre, Thomas, Per-Eric**)
1. fix the remaining conversion bugs for `sme` (**Børre, Tomi**)
1. return to `smj`, and fix whatever is left to fix (**Børre, Tomi**)
1. release a public beta at the end of April (**Børre, Sjur**)
1. implement the derivations as separate "continuation lexicons"
  (**Børre, Tomi**)
    1. done for sme

## Testing

### Spelling Error Markup

**TODO:**
* Set up ways of adding meta-information (source info, used in testing or not,
  added to lexicon or not) (**Saara**)
* test new and nested error markup (**Sjur**)

## Speller bugs

Open issues based on test results :

### sme
Version: **Davvisámi, version 1.0.1, 2008-04-01**
* 425 - **REGRESSION:** other words from Divvun.no - two words rejected
* 426 - comp words from Divvun.no - *guoktedássásaš* accepted - still **OPEN**
* 435 - roman numbers - **REGRESSION:** inflection of single letter numbers
        rejected (but is ok in `smj`)
    - we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
   separate lexicon file
* 452 - **REGRESSION:** several lexical bugs - *oažžuin* + *ožžuin*
* 595 - prefix+name wihtout hyphen (*ovdaLot* instead of *ovda-Lot*) - still
        **OPEN**
* 600 - gen+hyph compound *sámi-dáru* - still **OPEN**
* 603 - suomabealdi accepted - still **OPEN**
* 606 - speller accepts VUOHTA compound - still **OPEN**
* 607 - acro + hyphen - still **OPEN**
***NRKGA* is acro + clitic accepted without colon - what is correct?
* 611 - double hyphen sugg still accepted - still **OPEN**
* 613 - short gen. as second compound part - still **OPEN**
* 619 - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails - still **OPEN**
* 627 - prefix + hyhpen does not get accepted - still **OPEN**
* 629 - *a* taking part in compounding without hyphen - still **OPEN**
* 633 - double hyphens accepted in Word, not by cmdline speller - **FIXED**
* 634 - PropGen+hyph+PropGen - still **OPEN**
* 641 - numeral+noun compounds - still **OPEN**
* 642 - noun/adj/proper + hyphen + ain - still **OPEN**
* 644 - cased numeral+numeral compund - still **OPEN**
* 646 - adverb + hyphen + noun - still **OPEN**
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still **OPEN**
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still **OPEN**
* 649 - name + adj compound without hyphen - still **OPEN**
* 654 - speller does not recognize ordinals on -nuppelogát - still **OPEN**
* 655 - pron + nai - still **OPEN**
* 658 - Suggestion saame - still **OPEN**
* 660 - abbr. not recognised - **FIXED**

### smj
Version: **Julevsáme, version 1.0.1, 2008-04-01**
* 435 - roman number - single letter numbers now recognised
    -      we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
        separate lexicon file
    -      please note that *inflection* of single letter numerals is **fine** in
        `smj`, as opposed to `sme`
* 595 - prefix+name wihtout hyphen (*tsåhkeLot* instead of *tsåhke-Lot*) -
        still **OPEN**
* 600 - gen+hyph compound *sáme-dáro* - still **OPEN**
* 607 - acro + hyphen
***NRKGA* is acro + clitic accepted without colon - what is correct?
* 616 - Bispadime-me-ráden - still **OPEN**, try to find an acro or abbr *me*
* 619 - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails - still **OPEN**
* 629 - *a* taking part in compound - still **OPEN**
* 634 - rop gen + hyphen + Prop gen - still **OPEN**
* 641 - numeral+noun compounds - still **OPEN**
* 644 - cased numeral+numeral compund - still **OPEN**
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still **OPEN**
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still **OPEN**
* 649 - name + adj compound without hyphen - still **OPEN**
* 650 - noun prefix+name compound without hyphen - still **OPEN**
* 658 - Suggestion saame - still **OPEN**

**TODO:**
* compile new speller lexicons (**Tomi**)
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion (**Tomi**)

## Hyphenator bugs

Open issues based on test results :

### sme
Lexicon version: **Davvisámi, version 1.0.1, 2008-04-01**
* 468 - **REGRESSION:***Márkomeanu*
* 547 - **REGRESSION:** hyphen in front of vowel: *Lotnolasealáhusas*
* 548 - **REGRESSION:** mid syllable hyphenation: *Háliidivččen*
* 549 - **REGRESSION:** division without hyph: *Váccedettiin*
* 673 - adj-derivations: *guovttenuppelotčoarvvagiin* (the word is not rec.)
* 677 - **NEW:** Wrongly hyphenated ending -danidja

**TODO:**
* add remaining hyphenation bugs to Bugzilla (**Thomas**)
    - done

### smj
Lexicon version: **Julevsáme, version 1.0.1, 2008-04-01**
* 545 - **REGRESSION:** bad hyphenation in compounds: *åhpadusorganisásjåvnån*
         (not recognised)
* 546 - **REGRESSION:** obligatory hyph rules seem to work in facultative
        manner: *organisásjåvnån* (not recognised)
* 547 - **REGRESSION:** hyphen in front of vowel: *Jienastimnjuolgadusá* and
        *Orgánajs*
* 636 - hyphen before last char -> Divvun - **FIXED**

**TODO:**
* lexicalise *europarádeministarjuogos* (**Thomas**)
    - done
* try to fix 636 (**Thomas, Trond**)
    - done

## InDesign tools

We're waiting for an update from Polderland.

## Windows installer

This point is now moved to the section for future plans, and will be tackled as
time permits.

## Releases

**TODO:**
* update the *Changes* document (**Sjur**)
* documentation (**Sjur**)
    - Norwegian translation received from Davvi Girji

# Other

## Corpus contracts + open source

TODO:
* publish corpus contracts and project infra as open-source on NoDaLi-sta
  (**Sjur**)

# Next meeting, closing

The next meeting is 7.4.2008.

The meeting was closed at 11:50.

# Appendix - task lists for the next five days

## Boerre

* Hunspell lexicon conversion
* InDesign documentation
* prepare migration to svn (with **Sjur, Trond**)
* release a public beta at the end of April (with **Børre**)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Lene
* Ped project
* Add a flag !^P^ for forms to be excluded from ped. speller

## Maaren
* Put the list of possible `sma` corpus sources into a document

## Per-Eric

* keep the contact with Kurt Tores family about his texts.
* try to find other authors who have `smj` texts digitaly, send them contracts
* Work with missing list from Tjaktjalasta, Lars-Matto Tuolja.
* Work with missing list from texts written by Sigga Tuolja Sandström.
* Keep the contact with Ulf-Stefan Winka who has many more smj texts to add.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Saara
* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* Set up ways of adding meta-information for proofing correct corpus docs
  (source info, used in testing or not, added to lexicon or not)
* discuss more parallel texts

## Sjur

* gather `sma` texts
* name db/risten.no
* make an improved `sma` project plan
* publish corpus contracts and project infra as open-source on NoDaLi-sta
* prepare migration to svn (**Børre, Trond**)
* add Jabber account in iChat for Svenne, Joseph
* test the latest hunspell lexicon
* release a public beta at the end of April (with **Børre**)
* update the *Changes* document
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Thomas

* look at test cases still not behaving properly
* Add a flag !^P^ for forms to be excluded from ped. speller
* Hunspell: add `smj` to the soup, make sure it works roughly as good as `sme`
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Tomi

* Hunspell lexicon conversion
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
* fix double hyphen bugs
* compile new speller lexicons
* Make a pedagogical speller (after MA thesis is delivered)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond

* Work on `sma` analyser and visl integration
* Set up Jabber for Lene, Kimme, Saara
* Prepare svn migration (with **Sjur, Børre**)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
