!!!Meeting setup

* Date: 6.10.2008
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Internet
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat

!!!Agenda

Cf. one of the following, depending on context:
* the upper bar of the SEE window (provided you use the JSPWiki syntax mode)
* the TOC in Forrest-rendered output, like HTML and PDF

!!!Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 09:48.

Present: __Børre, Ciprian, David, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi__

Absent: __Jovsset, Trond__

Agenda accepted as is.

!!!Updated task status since last meeting

!!Børre
* Make a divvun-tools download log
** not done
* Make an extension package out of the spelling dictionaries
** did it, tested it on OS X, Windows and Linux, and on OpenOffice.org 2.4,
   3.0rcX and NeoOffice. Needs more work.
* check the hunspell test bench and tokenization errors
** not done
* test installation of dictionaries
** See above
* setup iCal server on the XServe
** Not done
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]
* other:
** Had a look at http://www.artofsolving.com/opensource/jodconverter to 
   streamline the conversion when adding files to our corpus, and also
   get access to more fileformats (in particular the OO.org ones). Worked well
   on my own machine, but didn't work on victorio. I will probably put the
   conversion on the xserve, and automatically move corpus files to victorio.

!!Ciprian
* close the open SVN repository at requested paths
** todo
* make a test-all target that runs all tests we have (with Sjur and Trond)
** todo
* define and document testing routines (with Sjur and Trond)
** todo
* continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (with __Sjur, Trond__)
** Transforming NOB data into XML-format to add "intelligence" to the NOB:SME
   dictionaries
* add three more texts to the corpus:
** todo

!!David
* continue gathering {{sma}} corpus texts
** recently uploaded the book ''Sanna - saemien niejte Johkemehkeste''. The work
   continues.
* consider the best way to inform potential users in Sweden about the Divvun
  tools
** Written and sent a pressrelease to local media. Sent the costs to advertise
   in two swedish same newspapers to Sjur.
* gather orthographic decisions (with __Maaren__)
** Have got some decisions. Nothing else than that seems to be done, except word
   lists.
* translate corpus contract to swedish (with __Jovsset__)
** not yet started with

!!Jovsset
* get the ''Verbh'' manuscript in electronic form
* Write and translate leaflet text, add pictures.
* Find a suitable infrastructure for the distribution of the CD version.
  Possible  through the library bus, the language centres and common
  sami centres in all of Sápmi.
* Talk to person who can talk to translator of
  ''Gåessie dah jeatjebh åerieminie''
* ask Sámi newspapers about the best way to inform potential users in Sweden
** done with __David__

!!Lene
* Work on test routine with __Trond__ and __Sjur__

!!Per-Eric
* follow-up on the {{smj}} texts from __Kurt Tore__
** contract done. Still need to get the actual texts.
* follow-up contracts from ''Nord-Salten avis'' and __Lena Davidsson__ 
* Work with missing list same_dutkama_pgr.txt
* Plan a {{smj}} pr tour for our tools
* contact __Ulf Stefan Winka__ for {{smj}} texts
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Saara
* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* Set up ways of adding meta-information for proofing correct corpus docs
  (source info, used in testing or not, added to lexicon or not)
* implement the ped UI and functionality

!!Sjur
* name db/risten.no
** nothing
* update the ''Changes'' document
** nothing
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
** nothing
* InDesign documentation
** nothing
* make a test-all target that runs all tests we have (with Trond and Ciprian)
** nothing
* define and document testing routines (with __Trond, Ciprian__)
** nothing
* write leaflet text
** nothing, but ready for others to read
* continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (with __Ciprian, Trond__)
** tested the new Mac dict (nobsme)
* make make target for MS Office 2008 spellers
** worked on it, not finished
* add odd-syllabic verbs from Verbh pp 146-160, in case __Linda__ can't
** done three pages
* reformulate the noun grammar like the verbs (with __Trond__)
** nothing
* Contact Davvi Girji about cooperation on electronic dictionaries
** nothing
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]
** nothing
* other things:
** finished an article with __Trond__, to go into a book about language
   technology. To be published before Christmas in Sweden (the book is in
   Swedish).
** checked __David's__ press release
** installed ''OpenXSpeller'', hunspell dictionaries
** started to write specification and offer request for {{sma}} subcontractor
   offer

!!Thomas
* prepare SGL-presentation of Divvun (Rica Romsa 1/10)
** done
* type the verbs in manually (missing: the odd-syllabic only, now at dïjmedidh
  on p. 113). The verbs to be added are the ones with p. 76 s. 161-175  
** done
* make speller-testbed
** done
* look at test cases still not behaving properly
** nothing this week
* translate leaflet text
** not yet
* work with presentation at Guovgageaidnu-symposia
** not yet
* {{sme->smj}} lexicon conversion to build bilingual lexicon resources, and
  increase {{smj}} coverage
** not yet
* send an e-mail to __Per-Eric__ and ask for corpus gathering status
** done
* ask __Leif-Åge__ to burn some Divvun CD's, and send them with Maaren
** done
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]
** some work done

!!Tomi
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
** not done
* fix double hyphen bugs
** working
* fix PL hyphenator errors
** not done
* fix PL and Hunspell conversion bugs
** working
* work with presentation at Guovgageaidnu-symposia
** not done
* test hyphenator with new speller lexicons
** not done
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Trond
* Hunspell QA README and installation docs
* Look at dictionaries pipeline
* Plan recording for text-to-speech
* South Sámi verbs
* South Sámi adjectives
* reformulate the noun grammar like the verbs (with __Sjur__)
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla].

!!!Pedagogical software online

Meeting memos can be found at 
[http://giellatekno.uit.no/ped/index.html#Meeting+memos]

__TODO:__
* implement the UI and functionality (__Saara__)
* get an easy-to-remember URL (__UiT/IT__) 
* More thorough skin, layout, ... (__External person within the Ped team__,
  __Internal forrest expert__) This we will postponed until later

!!!Corpus gathering

__David__ added one book, originally in Swedish, translated into {{sma}} as well
as {{sme}} and {{smj}}. Added {{sma}} text, will add original, and will ask for
permission to add thnowe other two translations as well.

Contract feedback: the contract is too long, and too heavy. We need a short, or
"light", version of the contract.

Processing steps for Sámi-Norwegian place name pairs from SK:
* convert to xml - retain all data, and a source mark (conversion script in both
  directions?)
* include in:
** bilingual dictionaries
** risten.no
** monolingual transducers
** subset in ped games (manual selection)
* add inflection etc (using existing data)

__TODO:__
* continue gathering {{sma}} corpus texts (__David, Jovsset__)
** some gathered, sent in through the home page
* follow-up on the {{smj}} texts from __Kurt Tore__ (__Per-Eric__)
** send an e-mail and ask for status (__Thomas__)
*** done
* other contacts: ''Nord-Salten avis'' (__Børge Strandskog__), Lena Davidsson
  daughter to Lars-Matto Tuolja
* __Ulf Stefan Winka__ has a lot of {{smj}} texts (__Per-Eric__)
** __Thomas__ has discussed this with __Per-Eric__
* plan a {{smj}} pr tour for our tools (__Per-Eric, Thomas__)
* meet with the Sámi publishers (meeting delayed) (__Jovsset__)
* add incoming {{sma}} texts to the corpus rep (__Børre, Ciprian__)
** Ciprian would like to add some more automatisation to the corpus processing
* make a 1-page, light version of the contract, also in Swedish
  (__Børre, David, Sjur, Trond__)
* fix the ''Upload more'' link (__Børre__)

!!!Promoting Divvun

__Thomas__ and __Tomi__ were at Rica Hotell Tromsø last week, presenting the
Divvun project for the SGL (Norwegian normative group, all but {{sma}} was
represented). They were very positively surprised, and seemed interested. They
even wanted to send texts to us.

Learning experience for us: even informed people do not really get what it is
all about until we meet them. Which means that we need to meet more people, to
get more people to use our tools and to send us texts.

__Thomas__ talked about the normative work, especially the {{smj}} normative
work. It is very unclear how loanwords should be normalised. Mentioned that
he had made some decisions himself (with clear examples), and got positive
response on that.

__TODO:__
* Make a download log (__Børre__)
** nothing new
* use a newspaper or something to write about the tools from an end-user point
  of view (a review in Š, Ávvir, Nordsalten avis?)
** __Tomi's__ contact in Finland has too much work, but suggested 
   __Astrid Helander__ at ''Ávvir'' instead. (__Thomas__)
* consider the best way to inform potential users in Sweden about the Divvun
  tools (__David__)
** __David__ has suggested to announce in ''Sáminuorat'' and ''Samefolket''
** preferably get an article in the papers at the same time, about the project
   and the tools
* Prepare for a coordinated info campaign when Ped is ready (inform teachers
  about Divvun as well as Ped when we inform about Ped) - next year
* Tour de Divvun (smj info tour) (__Thomas, Per-Eric__)
** fix the date
** make sure the leaflet is ready (see below)
** bring some CD's
* make leaflet to inform about the project (__Jovsset__)
** first draft available at
   {{xtdoc/sd/src/documentation/content/xdocs/leaflet/leaflet.sv.jspwiki}} as
   well as
   [http://www.divvun.no/leaflet/leaflet.sv.html]
** translate text when it is finished (__Thomas, Jovsset__)
* distribute CD version through the library bus, the language centres and common
  sami centres in all of Sápmi. Gaaltije in Östersund for example.
  (__Leif Åge, Jovsset__)
* contact MS Nordic, and ask them to include the Divvun tools in the next Office
  releases (both Windows and Mac). The integration can/should be done by
  Polderland, which is an official MS subcontractor/integrator. It could be used
  by MS as part of their advertising for the next releases, and it will make it
  much easier for people to get access to the tools. (__Sjur__)

!!!Future plans, directions and ideas

See a separate document in {{plan/strat/5year.jspwiki}}.

!!!Infrastructure
To accomodate future enhancements in different directions (in rough order of
importance):

# test bench for all parts of our language technology efforts
## test bench enhanced, but not yet complete
# more modularised make / build infra (prepare for smn, sms, sjd, others)
# merge gt, kt and st into one
# set up the Leopard Server features for collaborative support:
## permanent chat rooms
## stored (and indexed) chat transcripts of the chat rooms
## iCal server / group calendars
## wiki
# wiki? on G5 (is part of Leopard Server) or other web-based documentation
# improve Forrest stability and i18n support ( the divvun crashes)
## __Sjur__ has been working on better i18n and pdf rendering
## __Børre__ has some ideas for getting back to serving static html files
# reorganise the documentation:
## differ between target groups
## get better grouping
## decide what to write in forrest and what in wiki
   (cf. [Apertium|http://www.apertium.org/] and 
   [http://xixona.dlsi.ua.es/apertium/]) for a similar split)
## update/add missing parts
# migrate lexc lexicons to XML, splitting the task
## Name lexica (the Name project)
## Dictionaries (already in XML, task is to integrate them)
## At least migrate the lexc open POSes (Komi as a pilot case)
# change the look of the documentation web
# sfst?
## replacement for xfst -> see [omorf
   |http://www.ling.helsinki.fi/kieliteknologia/tutkimus/omor/index.shtml],
   [omorf wiki|https://kitwiki.csc.fi/twiki/bin/view/KitWiki/HfstHome] and
   [omorfi|https://gna.org/projects/omorfi]
## replacement for hunspell/open-source proofing tools
# investigate the [NSIS installer|http://nsis.sourceforge.net/Main_Page],
  potentially replacing the InstallShield
  package from Polderland
# corpus content moved to Max Planck repositories? Norsk språkbank?
# update infrastructure to allow content-restricted spellers for special target
  groups

SVN issues:
* http access not yet available (https only at the moment, but it works as
  anonymous checkout if the user is ''not'' specified)
* read access to the whole repo is working, BUT:
** {{gt/*/polderland}} should be protected
** {{plan}} should be protected
* everything will be google-able by default if the repo URL is posted
* certain users need to be on the UiT VPN to be able to commit (bug #705)
* UTF-8 problem in svn commit mails: the commit log text is garbled

__TODO:__
* make a test-all target that runs all tests we have (__Ciprian, Sjur, Trond__)
* define and document testing routines (__Ciprian, Sjur, Trond__)
* follow-up migration to svn:
** close the open SVN repository at requested paths (__Ciprian__)
** prepare and discuss with external users: Jack Ruether (__Trond__)
* setup iCal Server (on XServe) (__Børre__)
** working on it
* repair the G5 (__Børre__)
** received one e-mail asking for whether it is ok to format the disk

!!!Linguistics

!!North Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=711

!!Lule Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

__TODO:__
* {{sme->smj}} lexicon conversion to build bilingual lexicon resources, and
  increase {{smj}} coverage (__Trond__). 
* Add the words when all words are ready.

!!South Sámi

__TODO:__
* get the ''Verbh'' manuscript in electronic form (__Jovsset__)
** we give up, although we would welcome an answer
* get an overview over all problematic areas of the orthography (__David__)
** done as far as has been possible - a call to Lajla Mattsson-Magga confirmed
   the findings so far (ie mostly word lists have been handled, the only
   orthographic decision has been a partial decision on how to spell foreign
   words)
* type the verbs in manually (to be written into verb-lex-sma.txt: the 
  odd-syllabic only, now at dïjmedidh on p. 113). The verbs to be added 
  are the ones with p. 76
** 113-130  (__David__)
*** done
** 131-145  (__Jovsset__)
*** done
** 146-160  (__Linda__, __Sjur__ as backup -> __Thomas__)
*** done 3 pages
** 161-175  (__Thomas__)
*** done
** 176-190  (__Tomi__)
*** done (by __Thomas__)
** 191-205  (__Trond__)
*** done
* ask __Maja__ for the adjectives (__Trond__)
** done, it is ok to use them
* integrate adjectives into the analyser, without morphology as a starting point
  (__Trond, Sjur__)
* reformulate the noun grammar like the verbs (__Sjur, Trond__)

!!!Name lexicon/risten.no infrastructure

__TODO:__
# fix i18n bug in risten.no/G5 (so they will work without the proper locale
  request) (__Sjur__)
# fix bugs in lexc2xml; add comments to the log element (__Saara__)
# finish first version of the editing (__Sjur__)
# test editing of the xml files. If ok, then: (__Sjur, Thomas, Trond__)
# make terms-smX.xml <=== automatically from propernoun-sme-lex.xml (add {{nob}}
  as well) (the morphological section should be kept intact, in e.g.
  propernoun-sme-morph.txt) (__Sjur, Saara__)
# convert propernoun-($lang)-lex.txt to a derived file from common xml files
  (__Sjur, Tomi, Saara__)
# implement data synchronisation between [risten.no|http://www.risten.no] and
   the cvs repo, and possibly other servers (ie the G5 as an alternative server
   to the public risten.no - it might be faster and better suited than the
   official one; also local installations could be treated the same way)
# start to use the xml file as source file
# clean terms-sme.xml such that all names have the correct tag for their use
  (e.g. @type=secondary) (__Thomas, linguists__)
# merge placenames which are errouneously in different entries: e.g. Helsinki,
  Helsingfors, Helsset (__linguists__)
# publish the name lexicon on risten.no (__Sjur__)
# add missing parallel names for placenames (__linguists__)
# add informative links between first names like Niillas and Nils
  (__linguists__)

!!Dictionaries

{{nob-sme}} dictionary works, ie compilation and building works as it should.
Ciprian has also solved the paradigm generation issue on his computer, which
means morphological intelligence should be back in {{sme-nob}}.

To get the paradigm generation working, clean everything and make a new automata
and it should work.

September:
* content revision of smenob: 
** split in noun, propernoun, adj, verb, other
** make better content
* fix the frontend issue (windows, linux)
** Evaluate dictionary providers (Stardict, ...)
** Platform?

__TODO:__
* Continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (__Ciprian, Sjur, Trond__)
* clean up and generalise the make infrastructure
* improve Linux and Windows local/integrated versions
* make simple installer applications
* make a public release
** Make a homepage with instructions for dictionary use:
   {{xtdoc/gtuit/src/documentation/content/xdocs/dict.eng.xml}}
** Clarify the difference between local and online dictionaries:
*** Plugin for Firefox and Internet Explorer (online dictionaries)
* Contact Davvi Girji about cooperation on electronic dictionaries (__Sjur__)

!!!Proofing tools

!!Hunspell

In our process to make hunspell tools, {{makealias}}, a script that compacts the
hunspell dictionaries, has been incorporated ({{makealias}} is a shell script
available as part of the source distribution). The resulting files seem to crash
OO.org 3.0rcX at least on Windows and OS X.

The same files work well on OO.org 2.4 on Linux and Windows, and also as
systemwide spellcheckers for both Gnome and KDE4 applications.
Using the non-compacted hunspell dictionaries on OS X and OO.org 3.0 works well.
On Windows (in a virtual machine and 256MB RAM) and OO.org 3.0, the spelling 
process stalls, probably due to too little RAM. __Børre__ will test it again 
with more RAM.

__TODO:__
* QA README and installation docs - report (__Trond__)
* test the latest hunspell speller files (__Sjur__)
* check the hunspell test bench and tokenization errors (__Børre, Sjur__)
* make extension packages of the spellers (__Børre__)
* test installations on all platforms (__Børre__)
* fine tune suggestions (__Børre, Thomas__)

!!OpenXSpell

Working everywhere (almost) in MacOS X applications, provides Sámi spell
checking system-wide through a hunspell back-end. The main problem is that it
isn't yet UTF-8 safe. [OpenXSPell|http://www.cygnusblack.co.uk/openxspell/index.html]

__TODO:__
* fix the UTF-8 bug

!!Testing

!Spelling Error Markup

__TODO:__
* Set up ways of adding meta-information (source info, used in testing or not,
  added to lexicon or not) (__Saara__)
* test new and nested error markup (__Sjur__)

!Speller testing

We need a test file for testing the speller behaviour on a defined set of word
constructions: compounds of all types, derivations, inflections, and
combinations of those.

__TODO:__
* make speller test file for word types (__Thomas__)
** done
* create a new test case using the new data (__Sjur__)

!!Speller updates

__TODO:__
* test the spellers (__Divvun team__)
* new make target for Office 2008 (__Sjur__)
** progressing
* waiting for hyphenation updates for 2008 (__Polderland__)
** received

!!Speller bugs

List of bugs returned from Polderland: 621, 630, 652, 656, 676.

Open issues based on test results:

!sme
Version: __Davvisámi, version 1.0.1, 2008-09-25__
* 380 - __REGRESSION__ - citation compounds
* 397 - __REGRESSION__ - name compounds, their derivations, other compounds
* 426 - comp words from Divvun.no - ''guoktedássásaš'' accepted, some compounds
        not accepted - still __OPEN__
* 431 - __REGRESSION__ - name compounds / lowering in front of hyphen
* 435 - roman numbers - inflection of single letter numbers
        rejected, as well as some complex numbers (but is ok in {{smj}}) - still
        __OPEN__
** we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
   separate lexicon file
* 449 - __REGRESSION__ - ''suopmasápmelaš'' comps wrongly accepted
* 489 - __REGRESSION__ - stem vowel shortening / compound tags
* 581 - __REGRESSION__ - consonant doubling
* 525 - __REGRESSION__ - citation compounds not accepted (the bug relates to
        suggs)
* 536 - __REGRESSION__ - speller accepts "impossible" compound forms
* 539 - __REGRESSION__ - speller does not follow compound tagging
* 542 - __REGRESSION__ - speller does not pronouns + clitic
* 575 - __REGRESSION__ - name+name suggestions with double hyphens (legal
        compounds not accepted)
* 582 - __REGRESSION__ - noun+Prop without hyphen
* 593 - __REGRESSION__ - Missing words in beta 2
* 595 - prefix+name wihtout hyphen (''ovdaLot'' instead of ''ovda-Lot'') - still
        __OPEN__
* 597 - __REGRESSION__ - does not recognize nubbelohki
* 599 - __REGRESSION__ - numeral attr:s on lot
* 600 - gen+hyph compound ''sámi-dáru'' - still __OPEN__
* 603 - suomabealdi accepted - still __OPEN__
* 606 - speller accepts VUOHTA compound - __FIXED__
* 609 - __REGRESSION__ - Anár-julggaštusa not recognized
* 610 - __REGRESSION__ - duhát words missing
* 611 - double hyphen sugg still accepted - still __OPEN__
* 612 - __REGRESSION__ - case-forms of makkár
* 613 - short gen. as second compound part - still __FIXED__
* 619 - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails - still __OPEN__
* 627 - prefix + hyhpen does not get accepted - __FIXED__
* 629 - ''a'' taking part in compounding without hyphen - still __OPEN__
* 631 - __REGRESSION:__ number compound, numbers starting with 0
* 633 - double hyphens accepted
* 634 - PropGen+hyph+PropGen - still __OPEN__
* 641 - numeral+noun compounds - __FIXED__
* 642 - noun/adj/proper + hyphen + ain - __FIXED__
* 644 - cased numeral+numeral compund - still __OPEN__
* 646 - adverb + hyphen + noun - still __OPEN__
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still __OPEN__
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - __FIXED__
* 649 - name + adj compound without hyphen - still __OPEN__
* 654 - speller does not recognize ordinals on -nuppelogát - __FIXED__
* 655 - pron + nai - still __OPEN__
* 658 - Suggestion saame - __FIXED__
* 666 - __REGRESSION:__ guovtte- and njealje-
* 676 - triple-hyphen - now completely __FIXED__
* 696 - numerals + NAMAT-adjs + vuohta
* 697 - +N+Der1+Der/laš+A+Der3+Der/vuohta
* 709 - sámedikkeválga accepted, or with bad suggestion
* 717 - noun-acro compounds (juovla-CD)
* 728 - vowel shortening GenCmp+Left-tagged
* other __regressions:__
** ''eaktudáhtolaččat'' now accepted
** ''skuvlajagin'' now accepted - __FIXED__
** ''skierranis'' now accepted - __FIXED__

!smj
Version: __Julevsáme, version 1.0.1, 2008-09-15__
* 435 - roman number - single letter numbers now recognised
**      we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
        separate lexicon file
**      please note that ''inflection'' of single letter numerals is __fine__ in
        {{smj}}, as opposed to {{sme}}
* 482 - __REGRESSION:__ double hyphen, ''polar>-dutkamin'' suggested
* 496 - __REGRESSION:__ unrecognised clitics
* 595 - prefix+name wihtout hyphen (''tsåhkeLot'' instead of ''tsåhke-Lot'') -
        __FIXED__
* 599 - numeral attr:s on lot - still __OPEN__
* 600 - gen+hyph compound ''sáme-dáro'' - still __OPEN__
* 616 - Bispadime-me-ráden - still __OPEN__, try to find an acro or abbr ''me''
* 619 - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails - still __OPEN__
* 627 - __REGRESSION:__ prefix + hyhpen does not get accepted
* 629 - ''a'' taking part in compound - still __OPEN__
* 631 - __REGRESSION:__ number compound, numbers starting with 0
* 634 - rop gen + hyphen + Prop gen - still __OPEN__
* 641 - numeral+noun compounds - still __OPEN__
* 644 - cased numeral+numeral compund - still __OPEN__
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still __OPEN__
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still __OPEN__
* 649 - name + adj compound without hyphen - still __OPEN__
* 650 - noun prefix+name compound without hyphen - still __OPEN__
* 652 - __REGRESSION:__ UPPERCASE-typos only get acronym-suggestions
* 658 - Suggestion saame - __FIXED__
* 692 - numeral-variants
* 717 - __NEW:__ - noun-acro compounds
* 721 - __NEW:__ - Nom- and gen-numerals make compounds with nouns
* other __regressions:__
** ''gus'' NOT accepted anymore
** ''Svierigadárogielan'' NOT accepted anymore

__TODO:__
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion (__Tomi__)

!!Hyphenator bugs

Open issues based on test results :

!sme
Lexicon version: __Davvisámi, version 1.0.1, 2008-04-01__
* 468 - __REGRESSION:__''Márkomeanu''
* 547 - __REGRESSION:__ hyphen in front of vowel: ''Lotnolasealáhusas''
* 548 - __REGRESSION:__ mid syllable hyphenation: ''Háliidivččen''
* 549 - __REGRESSION:__ division without hyph: ''Váccedettiin''
* 673 - adj-derivations: ''guovttenuppelotčoarvvagiin'' (the word is not rec.)
* 677 - __NEW:__ Wrongly hyphenated ending -danidja - invalid

!smj
Lexicon version: __Julevsáme, version 1.0.1, 2008-04-01__
* 545 - __REGRESSION:__ bad hyphenation in compounds: ''åhpadusorganisásjåvnån''
         (not recognised)
* 546 - __REGRESSION:__ obligatory hyph rules seem to work in facultative
        manner: ''organisásjåvnån'' (not recognised)
* 547 - __REGRESSION:__ hyphen in front of vowel: ''Jienastimnjuolgadusá'' and
        ''Orgánajs''

__TODO:__
* fix PL hyphenator errors (__Tomi__)
* test hyphenator with new speller lexicons (__Tomi__)

!!InDesign tools

Nothing new.

!!Releases

__TODO:__
* update the ''Changes'' document (__Sjur__)
* InDesign documentation (__Sjur__)
** Norwegian translation received from Davvi Girji
* prepare 1.1 release soon

!!!Other

!!Forthcoming Sámi allaskuvla conference

Info on the
[conference site|http://www.samiskhs.no/index.php?c=304&kat=Giellasymposia].

Title submitted is: ''Goallosteapmi ja suorggideapmi Divvun-reaidduin''

Registration:
[http://www.viaregi.no/registration/deltagerweb.aspx?kid=3440&aid=8700]

Registration deadline is September 10.

__TODO:__
* write presentation (__Thomas, Tomi__)

!!Presentation at SGL, Rica Hotell Tromsø

Done, see report further up. No CD's showed up, though :(

!!Text to speech

We are planning a North Sámi text to speech. Work on the text-to-transcription
(ttt) component has begun, and for the transcription-to-sound we cooperate with
U Hki. For a forthcoming october demo we have two alternative tracks:

# Do the ttt with quasi-Finnish orthography as output, and plug it onto the
  Finnish ttt (the Sámi-as-a-Finnish-priest solution)  (pro: the web demo is
  there, so the demo is within reach; con: several phonemes are missing)
# Do the ttt with SAMPA as output, and read in 200 sentences, and have Hki
  generate a voice based upon that (pro: probably better result, head start on
  the project; con: we risk that is not be done by
# Do both in parallel. (pro: safety first, not much double work; con: well, 
  the double work in the phon-sme.xfst file)

The best thing would probably be to do both tracks, to be on the safe side.

{{{
echo "23847 ja de mun ipmirdán ja 12° ja §12 ja 23,2 ja 23,- ja 23-23" | jietna.sh
kuokː.hte.lo.gi kolə.bmɑ tuː.hɑːh kɑːvht.tsiː tʃuo.ðiː ɲeæl.lje lo.giː tʃie.dʃɑ 
jɑ te mun ip.mir.dɑːn jɑ kuokː.hte nup.pe.lohː.kɑːj grɑː.dɑ jɑ pɑ.rɑː.grɑː.fɑ...
}}}

__TODO:__
* Technical issues on the ttt automata (__Trond, ...__)
* Moving input to required xml format (__Helsinki__)
* Read in the 200 sentences (__Biret Ánne__)
* Make sounds out of them (__Helsinki__)


!!Corpus contracts + open source

Postponed until the svn repository is fully functional (it is too open now).

!!!Next meeting, closing

The next meeting is 13.10.2008, 9.30 Norwegian time.

The meeting was closed at 11:51.

!!!Appendix - task lists for the next five days

!!Boerre
[iCal|/doc/admin/weekly/2008/Tasks_2008-10-06_Boerre.ics]
* fix the ''Upload more'' link on the corpus upload page
* Make a divvun-tools download log
* Finish the OOo extension package of the hunspell dictionaries
* check the hunspell test bench and tokenization errors
* test installation of dictionaries
* setup iCal server on the XServe
* make a 1-page, light version of the corpus contract, also in Swedish
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Ciprian
[iCal|/doc/admin/weekly/2008/Tasks_2008-10-06_Ciprian.ics]
* close the open SVN repository at requested paths
* make a test-all target that runs all tests we have (with Sjur and Trond)
* define and document testing routines (with Sjur and Trond)
* continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (with __Sjur, Trond__)
* add three more texts to the corpus
* make the pipeline of ''StarDict'' dictionary generation running on the Mac
* have a closer look at the formatting for StarDict
* update the Makefile for generating dictionaries (related to the dictionary
  infrastructure task)

!!David
[iCal|/doc/admin/weekly/2008/Tasks_2008-10-06_David.ics]
* continue gathering {{sma}} corpus texts
* contact ''Samefolket'' or ''Sáminuorat'' about writing about the project and
  advertising.
* gather orthographic decisions (with __Maaren__)
* translate corpus contract to swedish (with __Jovsset__)
* make a 1-page, light version of the corpus contract, also in Swedish

!!Jovsset
[iCal|/doc/admin/weekly/2008/Tasks_2008-10-06_Jovsset.ics]
* get the ''Verbh'' manuscript in electronic form
* Write and translate leaflet text, add pictures.
* Find a suitable infrastructure for the distribution of the CD version.
  Possible  through the library bus, the language centres and common
  sami centres in all of Sápmi.
* Talk to person who can talk to translator of
  ''Gåessie dah jeatjebh åerieminie''

!!Lene
* Work on test routine with __Trond__ and __Sjur__

!!Per-Eric
[iCal|/doc/admin/weekly/2008/Tasks_2008-10-06_Per-Eric.ics]
* transfer the {{smj}} texts by __Kurt Tore__ to our corpus repository
* follow-up contracts from ''Nord-Salten avis'' and __Lena Davidsson__ 
* Work with missing list same_dutkama_pgr.txt
* Plan a {{smj}} pr tour for our tools
* contact __Ulf Stefan Winka__ for {{smj}} texts
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Saara
* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* Set up ways of adding meta-information for proofing correct corpus docs
  (source info, used in testing or not, added to lexicon or not)
* implement the ped UI and functionality

!!Sjur
[iCal|/doc/admin/weekly/2008/Tasks_2008-10-06_Sjur.ics]
* name db/risten.no
* update the ''Changes'' document
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652
* InDesign documentation
* make a test-all target that runs all tests we have (with __Trond, Ciprian__)
* define and document testing routines (with __Trond, Ciprian__)
* write leaflet text
* continue the dictionary infrastructure discussion (with __Ciprian, Trond__)
* make make target for MS Office 2008 spellers
* reformulate the noun grammar like the verbs (with __Trond__)
* Contact ''Davvi Girji'' about cooperation on electronic dictionaries
* subcontractor work for {{sma}} proofing tools, MS and Adobe versions
* support and maintenance contract for {{sme}} and {{smj}}, MS+Adobe tools
* write paper about our test bench to be presented at the [NLP for reading and
  writing|http://spraakbanken.gu.se/personal/sofie/SLTC_2008/SLTC_2008.html]
  workshop at [SLTC2008|http://www.speech.kth.se/sltc2008/] in Stockholm, Nov.
  20-21
* Sámi languages as part of ''Norsk språkbank''
* make a 1-page, light version of the corpus contract, also in Swedish
* contact MS Nordic, and ask them to include the Divvun tools in the next Office
  releases (both Windows and Mac). The integration can/should be done by
  Polderland, which is an official MS subcontractor/integrator. It could be used
  by MS as part of their advertising for the next releases, and it will make it
  much easier for people to get access to the tools.
* integrate {{sma}} adjectives into the analyser (without morphology)
* create a new test case using the new speller test data
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Thomas
* type the verbs in manually (missing: the odd-syllabic only, now at dïjmedidh
  on p. 113). The verbs to be added are the ones with p. 76 s. 146-160  
* fine tune suggestions for Hunspell
* look at test cases still not behaving properly
* translate leaflet text
* test leaflet installation instructions on Mac, Windows XP, Windows Vista
* work with presentation at Guovgageaidnu-symposia
* {{sme->smj}} lexicon conversion to build bilingual lexicon resources, and
  increase {{smj}} coverage
* contact __Astrid Helander__ at ''Ávvir'' for a project interview aimed at
  getting more knowledge about the tools out to the users = more users
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Tomi
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
* fix double hyphen bugs
* fix PL hyphenator errors
* fix PL and Hunspell conversion bugs
* work with presentation at Guovgageaidnu-symposia
* test hyphenator with new speller lexicons
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla]

!!Trond
[iCal|/doc/admin/weekly/2008/Tasks_2008-10-06_Trond.ics]
* Hunspell QA README and installation docs
* Look at dictionaries pipeline
* Plan recording for text-to-speech
* South Sámi verbs
* South Sámi adjectives
* reformulate the noun grammar like the verbs (with __Sjur__)
* make a 1-page, light version of the corpus contract, also in Swedish
* integrate {{sma}} adjectives into the analyser (without morphology)
* [fix bugs!|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla].
