# Meeting setup

* Date: 26.3.2008
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Internet
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat/Skype

# Agenda

Cf. one of the following, depending on context:
* the upper bar of the SEE window (provided you use the JSPWiki syntax mode)
* the TOC in Forrest-rendered output, like HTML and PDF

# Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 10:16.

Present: **Børre, Lene, Sjur, Thomas, Trond**

Absent: **Maaren, Per-Eric, Tomi**

Agenda accepted as is.

# Updated task status since last meeting

## Børre
* start to reorganise the documentation
* gather `sma` texts
* improve forrest stability with i18n, site look
* set up the Leopard Server features for collaborative support
* Hunspell lexicon conversion
* InDesign documentation
* investigate the NSIS installer
* give contract with blank fields to **Per-Eric**
    - done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
* Other:
    - Had a meeting with Davvi Girji and Čálliid lágádus. They agreed to add a 
   paragraph to their standard contracts which lets the Sami Parliament use
   the texts they publish.
    - Visited **Johan Jernsletten**, **Aage Solbakk** and **Kari Meløy** who signed
   contracts. Will also make contracts with **Yngve Engkvist**,
   **Harald Gaski**, **Siri Broch Johansen** and **Roald E. Kristiansen**.
   All in all this will give us quite a few books to work with.

## Lene
* Ped project - status:
    - waiting for **Tino** to do some changes of the synt.tags in the VISL-games
    - Saara is programming the morph-drill and question/answering-drill - we need
   good (funny?) names for the drills. Does anybody have suggestions?
    - Saara also makes an xml for the lexicon for the drills
    - I am doing other work now waiting for this. When Saara has finished the first 
   versions of the programming, then I will continue.
    - The next big task after the drills is to continue the work with the dialogues

## Maaren
* Put the list of possible `sma` corpus sources into a document
* update the *Changes* document

## Per-Eric
* keep the contact with Kurt Tores family about his texts.
    - Nothing new
* try to find other authors who have smj texts digitaly, send contracts to them
    - Nothing new
* Work with missing list from the bible texts.
    - Not done
* Keep the contact with Ulf-Stefan Winka who has many more smj texts to add.
    - Have some new texts from Sigga Tuolja Sandström, which I have done missing
   lists of and also texts from Lars-Matto Tuolja which I also have done missing 
   list of
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - Nothing done

## Saara
* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* Set up ways of adding meta-information for proofing correct corpus docs
  (source info, used in testing or not, added to lexicon or not)
* discuss more parallel texts

## Sjur
* start to reorganise the documentation
* gather `sma` texts
* improve forrest stability with i18n, site look
* set up the Leopard Server features for collaborative support
* name db/risten.no
* investigate the NSIS installer
* make a first `sma` project plan
* publish corpus contracts and project infra as open-source on NoDaLi-sta
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
* other things:
    - hyphenator bug hunting and reporting

## Thomas
* look at test cases still not behaving properly
    - not much done here
* add remaining hyphenation bugs to Bugzilla
    - done
* lexicalise *europarádeministarjuogos*
    - done
* try to fix 636
    - did not succeed
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - worked some

## Tomi
* Hunspell lexicon conversion
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
* fix double hyphen bugs
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond
* Reorganise documentation (with Børre and Sjur)
    - Not done
* Gather sma texts (with Børre and Sjur)
    - Not done
* Name lexicon project: Test editing xml files (when they are ready for it)
    - Not done
* Work on `sma` analyser and visl integration
    - Not so much here (but on smn, sms, sjd)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).

# Pedagogical software online

**UiT/GT** is developing their own language games & drills, in addition to the
VISL games. See Lene's report above. Links:

* [http://giellatekno.uit.no/oahpa/]
* [http://giellatekno.uit.no/ped/index.html]

Ped-speller? That is, a speller with restricted vocabulary and morphology (rare
words, names and forms are removed, possibly even compounding, ie with only
lexicalised compounds). Examples of problem pairs: *boaris* vs *buoris*,
*vieljas* vs *vielljas*. With a smaller lexicon, it might be possible to
increase the complexity of the suggestion ("phonetic") rules.

South Sámi ped-prog should be discussed with the `sma` groups we'll meet
throughout the spring.

Note that there is a new deadline for pedagogical and strengthening of language
projects within Sámediggi in the autumn. 

**TODO:**
* get an easy-to-remember URL (**UiT/IT**) 
* More thorough skin, layout, ... (**External person within the Ped team**,
  **Internal forrest expert**) This we will postpone until later
* Make a pedagogical speller (**Tomi** when finished with his MA thesis)
    - Add a flag !^P^ for forms to be excluded (**Thomas, Lene**)
    - Turn off peripheral compounds (numbers, acros, perhaps names)
    - Increase editing distance by one for suggestions? Only possible with limited
   compounding

# Documentation

**TODO:**
* start to reorganise the documentation (**Børre, Sjur, Trond**)

# Corpus gathering

**TODO:**
* follow-up on the `smj` texts from **Kurt Tore** (**Per-Eric**)
* get texts from **Sigga Tuolja Sandstrøm**, possibly through **Olavi Korhonen**
  (contract is ok now) (**Per-Eric**)
* other contacts: Nord-Salten avis, Børge Strandskog, Lena Davidsson daughter to
  Lars-Matto Tuolja
* gather `sma` texts (**Børre, Sjur, Trond, Joseph**)
* Put the list of possible corpus sources into a document
  `gt/doc/lang/sma/sma-corpus-plan.jspwiki` (**Maaren**)
* give contract with blank fields to **Per-Eric** (**Børre**)

# Future plans, directions and ideas

* more speller engines supported (to different degrees)
* more hyphenators supported
* grammar checker
    - what the society wants
    - it is interesting both for the university and SD
    - it is a very good cooperation project
* tailored proofing tools
* machine translation (further work to something useful)
* cooperation with groups teaching Sámi, starting at UiT
* speech
* searching and indexing
* automatic (bilingual) lexicon building, semantics
* more public visibility & delivery
* more open-source technology (sfst, other?)

See also a separate document in `plan/strat/5year.jspwiki`.

# Infrastructure

To accomodate future enhancements in different directions:
1. migrate to svn
1. merge gt, kt and st into one, probably after the svn move
1. more modularised make / build infra (prepare for smn, sms, sjd, others)
1. close certain parts of the code repository (requires svn)
1. set up the Leopard Server features for collaborative support:
    1. permanent chat rooms
    1. stored (and indexed) chat transcripts of the chat rooms
    1. iCal server / group calendars
    1. wiki
1. wiki? (is part of Leopard Server) or other web-based documentation
1. improve Forrest stability and i18n support
1. reorganise the documentation & look
1. migrate to XML
1. sfst? Both as replacement for xfst and for hunspell/open-source proofing tools
1. investigate the NSIS installer, potentially replacing the InstallShield
  package from Polderland
1. corpus content moved to Max Planck repositories?

**TODO:**
* add Jabber account in iChat (**all**)
* prepare migration to svn (**Børre, Sjur, Trond**)

# Linguistics

## North Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

## Lule Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

**TODO:**
* `sme->smj` lexicon conversion to build bilingual lexicon resources, and
  increase `smj` coverage (**Trond, Svenne**). 
* Add the words when all words are ready.

## South Sámi

Nothing new.

# Name lexicon infrastructure

**TODO:**
1. fix i18n bug in risten.no/G5 (so they will work without the proper locale
  request) (**Sjur**)
    1. it works ok locally, set-up / config needs to be checked on the G5; probably
   easy to fix
        1. it works the same both locally and on the G5, relates to i18n setup in
    forrest
1. fix bugs in lexc2xml; add comments to the log element (**Saara**)
1. finish first version of the editing (**Sjur**)
1. test editing of the xml files. If ok, then: (**Sjur, Thomas, Trond**)
1. make terms-smX.xml <=== automatically from propernoun-sme-lex.xml (add nob as
  well) (the morphological section should be kept intact, in e.g.
  propernoun-sme-morph.txt) (**Sjur, Saara**)
1. convert propernoun-($lang)-lex.txt to a derived file from common xml files
  (**Sjur, Tomi, Saara**)
1. implement data synchronisation between [risten.no](http://www.risten.no) and
   the cvs repo, and possibly other servers (ie the G5 as an alternative server
   to the public risten.no - it might be faster and better suited than the
   official one; also local installations could be treated the same way)
1. start to use the xml file as source file
1. clean terms-sme.xml such that all names have the correct tag for their use
  (e.g. @type=secondary) (**Thomas, Maaren, linguists**)
1. merge placenames which are errouneously in different entries: e.g. Helsinki,
  Helsingfors, Helsset (**linguists**)
1. publish the name lexicon on risten.no (**Sjur**)
1. add missing parallel names for placenames (**linguists**)
1. add informative links between first names like Niillas and Nils
  (**linguists**)

# Proofing tools

## Hunspell

**TODO:**
1. add `smj` to the soup, make sure it works roughly as good as `sme`
1. fix the remaining conversion bugs for `sme`
1. return to `smj`, and fix whatever is left to fix
1. integrate the derivations as separate "continuation lexicons"

## Testing

### Spelling Error Markup

**TODO:**
* Set up ways of adding meta-information (source info, used in testing or not,
  added to lexicon or not) (**Saara**)
* test new and nested error markup (**Sjur**)

## Speller bugs

Open issues based on test results :

### sme
Version: **Davvisámi, version 1.0.1, 2008-02-17**
* 426 - comp words from Divvun.no - *guoktedássásaš* accepted - still open
* 435 - roman number - single letter numbers now recognised
    - we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
   separate lexicon file
* 595 - prefix+name wihtout hyphen (*ovdaLot* instead of *ovda-Lot*)
* 600 - **REGRESSION:** gen+hyph compound *sámi-dáru*
* 603 - suomabealdi, norggabealdi accepted
* 606 - speller accepts VUOHTA compound
* 607 - acro + hyphen
***NRKGA* is acro + clitic accepted without colon - what is correct?
* 611 - double hyphen sugg still accepted
* 613 - short gen. as second compound part
* 619 - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails
* 627 - prefix + hyhpen does not get accepted
* 629 - *a* taking part in compounding without hyphen
* 633 - double hyphens accepted in Word, not by cmdline speller
* 634 - PropGen+hyph+PropGen
* 641 - numeral+noun compounds
* 642 - noun/adj/proper + hyphen + ain
* 644 - cased numeral+numeral compund
* 646 - adverb + hyphen + noun
* 647 - numerals+NOUN
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun
* 649 - name + adj compound without hyphen
* 654 - speller does not recognize ordinals on -nuppelogát
* 655 - pron + nai
* 658 - Suggestion saame
* 660 - abbr. not recognised

### smj
Version: **Julevsáme, version 1.0.1, 2008-02-14**
* 435 - roman number - single letter numbers now recognised
    - we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
   separate lexicon file
* 595 - prefix+name wihtout hyphen (*tsåhkeLot* instead of *tsåhke-Lot*)
* 600 - **REGRESSION:** gen+hyph compound *sáme-dáro*
* 607 - acro + hyphen
***NRKGA* is acro + clitic accepted without colon - what is correct?
* 616 - Bispadime-me-ráden - still **OPEN**, try to find an acro or abbr *me*
* 619 - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails - still **OPEN**
* 629 - *a* taking part in compound - still **OPEN**
* 634 - rop gen + hyphen + Prop gen - still **OPEN**
* 641 - numeral+noun compounds - still **OPEN**
* 644 - cased numeral+numeral compund
* 647 - numerals+NOUN
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun
* 649 - name + adj compound without hyphen
* 650 - noun prefix+name compound without hyphen
* 658 - Suggestion saame

**TODO:**
* compile new speller lexicons (**Tomi**)
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion (**Tomi**)

## Hyphenator bugs

Open issues based on test results :

### sme
* 468 - *Márkomeanu* -> Polderland - **FIXED**
* 548 - *duostan* -> Polderland - **FIXED**
* 549 - missing hyph at word boundary -> Polderland - **FIXED**
* 633 - extra hyphen inserted -> Divvun - **FIXED**

There are still some bugs found in the wordtypes test file. They should be added
to Bugzilla.

**TODO:**
* add remaining hyphenation bugs to Bugzilla (**Thomas**)

### smj
* 549 - missing hyph at word boundary -> Polderland - **FIXED**
* 633 - extra hyphen inserted -> Polderland - **FIXED**
* 636 - hyphen before last char -> Divvun

Possible solution:
```
define saveclitic  %# -> 0 | _ k .#. ;
```

The wordtypes test file does contain another problem, but that one belongs to
Polderland, and is reported.

**TODO:**
* lexicalise *europarádeministarjuogos* (**Thomas**)
* try to fix 636 (**Thomas, Trond**)

## InDesign tools

We're waiting for an update from Polderland.

## Windows installer

This point is now moved to the section for future plans, and will be tackled as
time permits.

## Releases

**TODO:**
* update the *Changes* document (**Børre**)
* documentation (**Sjur**)
    - Norwegian translation received from Davvi Girji

# Other

## Corpus contracts + open source

TODO:
* publish corpus contracts and project infra as open-source on NoDaLi-sta
  (**Sjur**)

# Next meeting, closing

The next meeting is 31.3.2008.

The meeting was closed at 13:16.

# Appendix - task lists for the next five days

## Boerre

* gather `sma` texts
* Hunspell lexicon conversion
* InDesign documentation
* update the *Changes* document
* prepare migration to svn (with **Sjur, Trond**)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Lene
* Ped project
* Add a flag !^P^ for forms to be excluded from ped. speller

## Maaren

* Put the list of possible `sma` corpus sources into a document

## Per-Eric

* keep the contact with Kurt Tores family about his texts.
* try to find other authors who have smj texts digitaly, send contracts to them
* Work with missing list from Tjaktjalasta, Lars-Matto Tuolja.
* Work with missing list from texts written by Sigga Tuolja Sandström.
* Keep the contact with Ulf-Stefan Winka who has many more smj texts to add.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Saara

* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* Set up ways of adding meta-information for proofing correct corpus docs
  (source info, used in testing or not, added to lexicon or not)
* discuss more parallel texts

## Sjur

* gather `sma` texts
* name db/risten.no
* make an improved `sma` project plan
* publish corpus contracts and project infra as open-source on NoDaLi-sta
* prepare migration to svn (**Børre, Trond**)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Thomas

* look at test cases still not behaving properly
* try to fix 636
* Add a flag !^P^ for forms to be excluded from ped. speller
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Tomi

* Hunspell lexicon conversion
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
* fix double hyphen bugs
* compile new speller lexicons
* Make a pedagogical speller (after MA thesis is delivered)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond

* Work on `sma` analyser and visl integration
* try to fix 636
* Prepare svn migration (with **Sjur, Børre**)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
