# Meeting setup

* Date: 4.2.2008
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Internet
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat/Skype

# Agenda

Cf. one of the following, depending on context:
* the upper bar of the SEE window (provided you use the JSPWiki syntax mode)
* the TOC in Forrest-rendered output, like HTML and PDF

# Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 09:43.

Present: **Børre, Per-Eric, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi**

Absent: **Maaren, Trond**

Agenda accepted as is.

# Updated task status since last meeting

## Børre
* start to reorganise the documentation
    - not done
* gather `sma` texts
    - not done
* improve forrest stability with i18n, site look
    - did some changes in the layout, but that had to be reversed
* set up the Leopard Server features for collaborative support
    - not done
* Hunspell lexicon conversion
    - debugged propernoun generation, not finished
* InDesign documentation
    - not done
* investigate the NSIS installer
    - nothing new this week
* release InDesing tools Jan. 30.
    - not done
* work on Tromsø Sami workshop paper
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=640

## Lene
* Ped project
* work on Tromsø Sami workshop paper

## Maaren
* Put the list of possible `sma` corpus sources into a document
* update the *Changes* document

## Per-Eric
* check some unusual and missing words from the last Olavi missing list
    - Working and working, maybe ready this week
* keep the contact with Kurt Tores family about his texts.
    - Heard nothing yet
* try to find other authors who have smj texts digitaly
    - Nothing yet 
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - Worked with it

## Saara
* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* Set up ways of adding meta-information for proofing correct corpus docs
  (source info, used in testing or not, added to lexicon or not)
* discuss more parallel texts

## Sjur
* start to reorganise the documentation
* gather `sma` texts
* improve forrest stability with i18n, site look
* set up the Leopard Server features for collaborative support
* check the present `sma` sources
* name db/risten.no
* investigate the NSIS installer
* get hotel rooms in Snåsa
    - done
* make a first `sma` project plan
* publish corpus contracts and project infra as open-source on NoDaLi-sta
* release InDesing tools Jan. 30.
    - almost done, release candidate ready by Friday Feb. 1., but not all bugs
   fixed.
* work on Tromsø Sami workshop paper
* updated Polderland tools by Wednesday
    - arrived on Thursday, and only speller updates. Hyphenator bugs still open
* final changes and bug fixes by Thursday afternoon
    - known ones done, we need the hyph fixes from Polderland before we can analyse
   the rest
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
* other things:
    - identified the non-displaying column in risten.no on the G5 to be
   browser-specific - it works fine in Firefox and related browsers
    - tried to solve the non-displaying column (iframe) issue
    - tried to solve the i18n issue in risten.no on the G5

## Thomas
* look at test cases still not behaving properly
    - worked some
* release InDesing tools Jan. 30.
    - almost
* work on Tromsø Sami workshop paper
    - not done
* final changes and bug fixes by Thursday afternoon
    - done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - worked some

## Tomi
* Hunspell lexicon conversion
    - not done
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
    - not done
* release InDesing tools Jan. 30.
    - done
* work on Tromsø Sami workshop paper
    - not done
* debug %> problem in Hunspell conversion
    - done
* fix double hyphen bugs
    - worked on it
* new lexicons by Tuesday
    - done
* final changes and bug fixes by Thursday afternoon
    - done
* final lexicons by Friday morning
    - done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - done

## Trond
* Report the smesmj project
* Start working on the samdoc talk
* `sme->smj` lexicon conversion to build bilingual lexicon resources
* Reorganise documentation (with Børre and Sjur)
* Gather sma texts (with Børre and Sjur)
* Look at the sma source files (with Sjur)
* Name lexicon project: Test editing xml files (when they are ready for it)
* Make a first `sma` project plan
* work on Tromsø Sami workshop paper
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).

# Pedagogical software online

**TODO:**
* Setting up the user documentation with an external address, and
  cross-reference via tabs to giellatekno and divvun. (**Børre**)
    - [done](http://giellatekno.uit.no/oahpa/)
* get an easy-to-remember URL (**UiT/IT**) 
* More thorough skin, layout, ... (**External person within the Ped team**,
  **Internal forrest expert**) This we will postpone until later

# Workshop in Tromsø, end of February

**TODO:**
* Presentation of our work
    - Basic tools (**Sjur, Trond, Thomas**)
    - Applications (**Lene, Sjur**)
    - Corpus infrastructure (**Børre, Saara, Sjur**)
    - Overall infrastructure ("Makefile") (**Sjur, Tomi**)
* Plans for future work (**Sjur, Trond**)
* Relevance for other projects
    - Standard written language texts (**Trond**)
    - Existing written dialect texts (**Lene, Trond**)
    - Existing dialect recordings (**Lene**)
* Turn the text into slides (samdoc08.tex into samdoc08-sem.tex (**Trond**)

# Documentation

**TODO:**
* start to reorganise the documentation (**Børre, Sjur, Trond**)

# Corpus gathering

**TODO:**
* follow-up on the `smj` texts from **Kurt Tore** (**Per-Eric**)
* get texts from **Sigga Tuolja Sandstrøm** (**Per-Eric**)
* gather `sma` texts (**Børre, Sjur, Trond**)
* Put the list of possible corpus sources into a document
  `gt/doc/lang/sma/sma-corpus-plan.jspwiki` (**Maaren**)

# Infrastructure

**TODO:**
* add Jabber account in iChat (**all**)
* improve forrest stability with i18n, site look (**Børre, Sjur, Tomi**)
* set up the Leopard Server features for collaborative support - permanent chat
  rooms, project calendar(s), wiki? (**Børre, Sjur**)

# Linguistics

## North Sámi

Hyphenation bugs still there, now properly documented by the improved test
bench.

## Lule Sámi

Hyphenation: same as for `sme`.

**TODO:**
* `sme->smj` lexicon conversion to build bilingual lexicon resources, and
  increase `smj` coverage (**Trond, Svenne**). 
* Add the words when all words are ready.

## South Sámi

**TODO:**
* check the present sources (**Sjur, Trond**)

# Name lexicon infrastructure

**TODO:**
1. fix i18n bug in risten.no/G5 (so they will work without the proper locale
  request) (**Sjur**)
    1. it works ok locally, set-up / config needs to be checked on the G5; probably
   easy to fix
        1. looked at it
1. fix display in column 3 (**Sjur**)
    1. it works in Firefox and other Mozilla-based browsers; not in Safari and other
   Webkit-based browsers
        1. looked at it
1. fix bugs in lexc2xml; add comments to the log element (**Saara**)
1. finish first version of the editing (**Sjur**)
1. test editing of the xml files. If ok, then: (**Sjur, Thomas, Trond**)
1. make terms-smX.xml <=== automatically from propernoun-sme-lex.xml (add nob as
  well) (the morphological section should be kept intact, in e.g.
  propernoun-sme-morph.txt) (**Sjur, Saara**)
1. convert propernoun-($lang)-lex.txt to a derived file from common xml files
  (**Sjur, Tomi, Saara**)
1. implement data synchronisation between [risten.no](http://www.risten.no) and
   the cvs repo, and possibly other servers (ie the G5 as an alternative server
   to the public risten.no - it might be faster and better suited than the
   official one; also local installations could be treated the same way)
1. start to use the xml file as source file
1. clean terms-sme.xml such that all names have the correct tag for their use
  (e.g. @type=secondary) (**Thomas, Maaren, linguists**)
1. merge placenames which are errouneously in different entries: e.g. Helsinki,
  Helsingfors, Helsset (**linguists**)
1. publish the name lexicon on risten.no (**Sjur**)
1. add missing parallel names for placenames (**linguists**)
1. add informative links between first names like Niillas and Nils
  (**linguists**)

# Proofing tools

## Hunspell

The %> marker does not survive into Hunspell to work as a boundary marker, 
despite being defined as %> for the Hunspell version. 

**TODO:**
1. debug the missing > marker - the problem is on the Java side (**Børre, Tomi**)
1. add `smj` to the soup, make sure it works roughly as good as `sme`
1. fix the remaining conversion bugs for `sme`
1. return to `smj`, and fix whatever is left to fix
1. integrate the derivations as separate "continuation lexicons"

## Testing

### Spelling Error Markup

**TODO:**
* Set up ways of adding meta-information (source info, used in testing or not,
  added to lexicon or not) (**Saara**)
* test new and nested error markup (**Sjur**)

## Speller bugs

Open issues based on test results :

### sme
Version: **Davvisámi, version 1.0.1, 2008-01-31**
* 425 - roman number - will not be fixed in 1.0 release - **FIXED**
* 426 - comp words from Divvun.no - *guoktedássásaš* accepted - still open
* 536 - speller accepts "impossible" compound-forms, *geažideapmigárvu* and
       *giddesteapmisággi* accepted - **FIXED**
* 593 - missing words in beta2 - **FIXED**
* 595 - prefix+name wihtout hyphen (*ovdaLot* instead of *ovda-Lot*)
* 597 - does not recognize nubbelohki - **FIXED**
* 603 - suomabealdi, norggabealdi accepted
* 606 - speller accepts VUOHTA compound
* 611 - double hyphen sugg still accepted
* 613 - short gen. as second compound part
* 619 - **REGRESSION:** - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails
* 625 - word+footnote - possibly Polderland or MS, or a consequence of allowing
        spell checking of words including digits
* 627 - prefix + hyhpen does not get accepted
* 629 - *a* taking part in compounding without hyphen
* 631 - numbers starting with 0 - **FIXED**
* 633 - double hyphens accepted in Word, not by cmdline speller
* 634 - PropGen+hyph+PropGen
* 637 - nai(go) becomes -naj(go) - **FIXED**
* 641 - umeral+noun compounds
* 642 - noun/adj/proper + hyphen + ain

### smj
Version: **Julevsáme, version 1.0.1, 2008-01-31**
* 482 - *Nuorttalijguovlojn* accepted again
    - testcase changed, test **PASSED**
* 607 - acro + hyphen, *NRKGA* accepted - test pair is wrong, should be corr.
* 615 - actio and actor compounds - **FIXED**
* 616 - Bispadime-me-ráden - still **OPEN**
* 618 - dipht. simpl. - **FIXED**
* 619 - **REGRESSION:** - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails
* 629 - *a* taking part in compound - still **OPEN**
* 631 - number compounds starting with 0 - **FIXED**
* 634 - rop gen + hyphen + Prop gen
* 641 - umeral+noun compounds

**TODO:**
* look at test cases still not behaving properly (**Thomas, Tomi**)
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion (**Tomi**)

## Hyphenator bugs

Open issues based on test results :

### sme
* 468 - *Márkomenau* -> Polderland
* 548 - *duostan* -> Polderland
* 549 - missing hyph at word boundary -> Polderland
* 633 - extra hyphen inserted -> Polderland

### smj
* 549 - missing hyph at word boundary -> Polderland
* 633 - extra hyphen inserted -> Polderland
* 636 - hyphen before last char -> Polderland

## InDesign tools

Near-final tools were released on Friday, Feb. 1, including working user
dictionary functionality.

**TODO:**
* test twolc hash mark bug solution (**Tomi, Trond, Sjur**)
    - done - it worked fine, and is the only possible solution due to special treatment of this bug in `twolc`
* fix double hyphen bugs (**Tomi**)
* new lexicons by Tuesday (**Tomi**)
    - done
* updated Polderland tools by Wednesday (**Sjur**)
    - done, delivered on Thursday
* final changes and bug fixes by Thursday afternoon (**Thomas, Sjur, Tomi**)
    - done
* final lexicons by Friday morning (**Tomi**)
    - done

## Windows installer

**TODO:**
* investigate the NSIS installer (**Børre, Sjur**)

## Releases

**TODO:**
* update the *Changes* document (**Maaren**)
* release InDesing tools Jan. 30. (**Børre, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi**)
    - compile new lexicons (**Tomi**)
        - done
    - test (**all**)
        - partially done
    - document (**Sjur**)
        - not really
    - package and release (**Sjur**)
        - done

# Other

## South Sámi project startup meeting

* in Snåsa
* 11th - 15th of Feb, kick-off meeting Wednesday 13.
* Participants: SD (incl. Divvun), Nord-Trøndelag fylkeskommune, Snåsa kommune,
  UiT, "resource persons", south Sámi part of SGL (at least one representative)

We extend the meeting on our part, to have this project's first gathering.

Travel plans - arriving/leaving at Værnes:
* **Børre:** 
* **Maaren:** Tuesday or Wednesday
* **Per-Eric:** 11:30 / xxx
* **Sjur:** sunday /
* **Svenne:** 
* **Thomas:** 
* **Tomi:** sunday /
* **Trond:** sunday / Tuesday afternoon

Goal: to be at Værnes Friday afternoon around 14, targeting planes from
15 or so onwards. That means leaving Snåsa around 12.

**TODO:**
* get hotel rooms (**Sjur**)
    - done
* make a first `sma` project plan (**Sjur, Trond**)

## Corpus contracts + open source

TODO:
* publish corpus contracts and project infra as open-source on NoDaLi-sta
  (**Sjur**)

# Next meeting, closing

The next meeting is 11.2.2008 in Snåsa.

The meeting was closed at 10:40.

# Appendix - task lists for the next five days

## Boerre

* start to reorganise the documentation
* gather `sma` texts
* improve forrest stability with i18n, site look
* set up the Leopard Server features for collaborative support
* Hunspell lexicon conversion
* InDesign documentation
* investigate the NSIS installer
* release InDesing tools Jan. 30.
* work on Tromsø Sami workshop paper
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Lene
* Ped project
* work on Tromsø Sami workshop paper

## Maaren

* Put the list of possible `sma` corpus sources into a document
* update the *Changes* document

## Per-Eric

* check some unusual and missing words from the last Olavi missing list
* keep the contact with Kurt Tores family about his texts.
* try to find other authors who have smj texts digitaly 
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Saara

* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* Set up ways of adding meta-information for proofing correct corpus docs
  (source info, used in testing or not, added to lexicon or not)
* discuss more parallel texts

## Sjur

* start to reorganise the documentation
* gather `sma` texts
* improve forrest stability with i18n, site look
* set up the Leopard Server features for collaborative support
* check the present `sma` sources
* name db/risten.no
* investigate the NSIS installer
* publish corpus contracts and project infra as open-source on NoDaLi-sta
* work on Tromsø Sami workshop paper
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Thomas

* look at test cases still not behaving properly 
* work on Tromsø Sami workshop paper
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Tomi

* Hunspell lexicon conversion
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
* work on Tromsø Sami workshop paper
* fix double hyphen bugs
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond

* Report the smesmj project
* Start working on the samdoc talk
* `sme->smj` lexicon conversion to build bilingual lexicon resources
* Reorganise documentation (with Børre and Sjur)
* Gather sma texts (with Børre and Sjur)
* Look at the sma source files (with Sjur)
* Name lexicon project: Test editing xml files (when they are ready for it)
* Make a first `sma` project plan
* work on Tromsø Sami workshop paper
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
