# Meeting setup

* Date: 28.4.2008
* Time: 12.30 Norw. time
* Place: Internet
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat/Skype

# Agenda

Cf. one of the following, depending on context:
* the upper bar of the SEE window (provided you use the JSPWiki syntax mode)
* the TOC in Forrest-rendered output, like HTML and PDF

# Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 10:06.

Present: **Børre, Jovsset, Per-Eric, Sjur, Thomas, Trond**

Absent: **Tomi**

Agenda accepted as is.

# Updated task status since last meeting

## Børre
* Hunspell lexicon conversion
    - found out how to convert the four big lexicons to hunspell. No compounding
   info yet, though.
* prepare migration to svn (with **Sjur, Trond**)
    - have converted our cvs to svn, svn+ssh access works for me. Have had problems
   setting up apache authentication
* release hunspell public beta at the end of April (with **Sjur**)
* review hunspell lexicon branch (with **Thomas**), merge with trunk if ok
    - **Thomas** is working on it
* try to repair G5 accounts for iCal Server
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Lene
* Ped project

## Maaren
* Put the list of possible `sma` corpus sources into a document

## Per-Eric
* try to find other authors who have `smj` texts digitaly, send them contracts
    - Nothing done
* Work with missing list from texts written by Sigga Tuolja Sandström.
    - Worked and still working
* Work with missing list same_dutkama_pgr.txt
    - Nothing done yet
* Work with missing list sameriekta_tjoahkkagæsos.txt
    - Nothing done yet
* Keep the contact with Ulf-Stefan Winka who has many more smj texts to add.
    - Nothing done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - Nothing done

## Saara
* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* Set up ways of adding meta-information for proofing correct corpus docs
  (source info, used in testing or not, added to lexicon or not)
* discuss more parallel texts

## Sjur
* gather `sma` texts
    - several new contacts during the trip last week, two half-finished contracts
   on its way
* name db/risten.no
    - nothing - was travelling last week
* make an improved `sma` project plan
    - nothing - was travelling last week
* publish corpus contracts and project infra as open-source on NoDaLi-sta
    - nothing - was travelling last week
* prepare migration to svn (with **Børre, Trond**)
    - nothing - was travelling last week
* release hunspell public beta at the end of April (with **Børre**)
    - nothing - was travelling last week
* update the *Changes* document
    - nothing - was travelling last week
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652, 656
    - nothing - was travelling last week
* test latest hunspell lexicon
    - forgot it:(
* InDesign documentation
    - nothing - was travelling last week
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
* other things:
    - made a first version of a MacOS X dictionary for sme-smj and sme-nob based on
   the results of the UiT projects. Stll missing: morphology

## Thomas
* look at test cases still not behaving properly
    - nothing this week
* review hunspell lexicon branch with **Børre**
    - working on this
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - nothing this week

## Tomi
* Hunspell lexicon conversion
    - helped **Børre** with this
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
    - not done
* fix double hyphen bugs
    - not done
* Make a pedagogical speller (after MA thesis is delivered)
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond
* Help **Jovsset** with vislcg3 and sma
* Set up Jabber for Lene, Kimme, Saara
* Prepare svn migration (with **Sjur, Børre**)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).

# Pedagogical software online

Working on it: **Saara** has a demo UI ready for vocabulary games, but not online yet. **Lene** has
worked a lot on the word lists.

**TODO:**
* get the content ready (**Lene**)
* implement the UI and functionality (**Saara**)
* get an easy-to-remember URL (**UiT/IT**)
* More thorough skin, layout, ... (**External person within the Ped team**,
  **Internal forrest expert**) This we will postponed until later
* Make a pedagogical speller (**Tomi** when finished with his MA thesis)
    - Turn off peripheral compounds (numbers, acros, perhaps names)
    - Increase editing distance by one for suggestions? Only possible with limited
   compounding

# Documentation

**TODO:**
* start to reorganise the documentation (**Børre, Sjur, Trond**)

# Corpus gathering

**Trond, Sjur, Jovsset** were travelling last week, and got several contacts for
`sma` corpus content. To be followed up.

**TODO:**
* follow up on `sma` corpus texts (**Sjur, Jovsset**)
* follow-up on the `smj` texts from **Kurt Tore** (**Per-Eric**)
* get texts from **Sigga Tuolja Sandstrøm**, possibly through
  **Ulf-Stefan Winka**
  (contract is ok now) (**Per-Eric**)
* other contacts: Nord-Salten avis (**Børge Strandskog**), Lena Davidsson
  daughter to Lars-Matto Tuolja
* Put the list of possible corpus sources into a document
  `gt/doc/lang/sma/sma-corpus-plan.jspwiki` (**Maaren**)
* give contract with blank fields to **Per-Eric** (**Børre**)

# Future plans, directions and ideas

See a separate document in `plan/strat/5year.jspwiki`.

# Infrastructure

Changes in the lexicon cause big problems for **Lene** - she is using up to half
her time to "fix" her rules to adapt to these changes. Types of changes:
* tag changes
* word changes (from lexicalised to compound)
* classification changes (from abbr to acro, or similar)

Conclusions:
* public pages and services should only be updated manually, and when we know
  the update is working
* the whole product line must be more robust, such that small, local changes do
  *not* cause widespread errors
* we need a larger test battery to run regularly (every night, before larger
  changes
* a set of smaller tests that can be run automatically as part of the commit
  process

To accomodate future enhancements in different directions (in rough order of
importance):
1. test bench for all parts of our language technology efforts
1. migrate to svn
1. merge gt, kt and st into one, probably after the svn move
1. more modularised make / build infra (prepare for smn, sms, sjd, others)
1. close certain parts of the code repository (requires svn)
1. set up the Leopard Server features for collaborative support:
    1. permanent chat rooms
    1. stored (and indexed) chat transcripts of the chat rooms
    1. iCal server / group calendars
    1. wiki
1. wiki? (is part of Leopard Server) or other web-based documentation
1. improve Forrest stability and i18n support
1. reorganise the documentation content:
    1. differ between target groups
    1. get better grouping
    1. decide what to write in forrest and what in wiki
   (cf. Apertium for a similar split)
    1. update/add missing parts
1. migrate lexicons to XML, splitting the task
    1. Name lexica (the Name project)
    1. Dictionaries (already in XML, task is to integrate them)
    1. Open POSes (Komi as a test case)
1. change the look of the documentation web
1. sfst? Both as replacement for xfst and for hunspell/open-source proofing tools
1. investigate the NSIS installer, potentially replacing the InstallShield
  package from Polderland
1. corpus content moved to Max Planck repositories?

**TODO:**
* add CG regression test (**Lene, Sjur, Trond**)
* make a test-all target that runs all tests we have (**Børre, Sjur, Trond**)
* define and document testing routines (**Børre, Sjur, Trond**)
* add Jabber account in iChat
    - check that all accounts are ready for iChat on the G5 (**Børre**)
    - UiT: Lene, Kimme, Saara (**Trond**)
* prepare migration to svn (**Børre, Sjur, Trond**)
    - svn+ssh access is working, please test!
   svn checkout svn+ssh://gtsvn.uit.no/usr/local/svn/repos/ gt
* try to repair G5 accounts for iCal Server (**Børre**)

# Linguistics

## North Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

## Lule Sámi

(nothing new, see proofing bugs below)

**TODO:**
* `sme->smj` lexicon conversion to build bilingual lexicon resources, and
  increase `smj` coverage (**Trond, Svenne**).
* Add the words when all words are ready.

## South Sámi

Nothing new since last week.

# Name lexicon infrastructure

Much work last week on the SD-terms collection, and the editing code relating to
it. All old legacy code was cleaned and moved into the proper place, and
deletion of entries was added.

Next up: to finish the work on the SD-terms collection (editing), then look at
the name lexicon, and also dictionary search interface.

**TODO:**
1. fix i18n bug in risten.no/G5 (so they will work without the proper locale
  request) (**Sjur**)
1. fix bugs in lexc2xml; add comments to the log element (**Saara**)
1. finish first version of the editing (**Sjur**)
1. test editing of the xml files. If ok, then: (**Sjur, Thomas, Trond**)
1. make terms-smX.xml <=== automatically from propernoun-sme-lex.xml (add nob as
  well) (the morphological section should be kept intact, in e.g.
  propernoun-sme-morph.txt) (**Sjur, Saara**)
1. convert propernoun-($lang)-lex.txt to a derived file from common xml files
  (**Sjur, Tomi, Saara**)
1. implement data synchronisation between [risten.no](http://www.risten.no) and
   the cvs repo, and possibly other servers (ie the G5 as an alternative server
   to the public risten.no - it might be faster and better suited than the
   official one; also local installations could be treated the same way)
1. start to use the xml file as source file
1. clean terms-sme.xml such that all names have the correct tag for their use
  (e.g. @type=secondary) (**Thomas, Maaren, linguists**)
1. merge placenames which are errouneously in different entries: e.g. Helsinki,
  Helsingfors, Helsset (**linguists**)
1. publish the name lexicon on risten.no (**Sjur**)
1. add missing parallel names for placenames (**linguists**)
1. add informative links between first names like Niillas and Nils
  (**linguists**)

# Proofing tools

## Hunspell

Printed out a partial fullword list, containing both the *>* and the *»*
marks. Found out that double suffix stripping means that one continuation
lexicon can point one lexicon further, but not more than that (sic!).

Made a python script that parses fullword lists, and prints out working .dic and
 .aff files. It has the same function as Polderlands program that parses our
output. This script is slow, and has to be rewritten in C++ or Java.

**TODO:**
1. review hunspell lexicon branch, merge with trunk if ok (**Børre, Thomas**)
1. test latest lexicon (**Sjur**)
1. add `smj` to the soup, make sure it works roughly as good as `sme`
  (**Børre, Thomas, Per-Eric**)
    1. added to derivations, needs to be tested
1. fix the remaining conversion bugs for `sme` (**Børre, Tomi**)
1. return to `smj`, and fix whatever is left to fix (**Børre, Tomi**)
1. release a public beta at the end of April (**Børre, Sjur**)

## Testing

### Spelling Error Markup

**TODO:**
* Set up ways of adding meta-information (source info, used in testing or not,
  added to lexicon or not) (**Saara**)
* test new and nested error markup (**Sjur**)

## Speller bugs

List of bugs returned from Polderland: 621, 630, 652, 656, 676.

Open issues based on test results :

### sme
Version: **Davvisámi, version 1.0.1, 2008-04-01**
* 425 - **REGRESSION:** other words from Divvun.no - two words rejected
* 426 - comp words from Divvun.no - *guoktedássásaš* accepted - still **OPEN**
* 435 - roman numbers - **REGRESSION:** inflection of single letter numbers
        rejected (but is ok in `smj`)
    - we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
   separate lexicon file
* 452 - **REGRESSION:** several lexical bugs - *oažžuin* + *ožžuin*
* 595 - prefix+name wihtout hyphen (*ovdaLot* instead of *ovda-Lot*) - still
        **OPEN**
* 600 - gen+hyph compound *sámi-dáru* - still **OPEN**
* 603 - suomabealdi accepted - still **OPEN**
* 606 - speller accepts VUOHTA compound - still **OPEN**
* 607 - acro + hyphen - still **OPEN**
***NRKGA* is acro + clitic accepted without colon - what is correct?
* 611 - double hyphen sugg still accepted - still **OPEN**
* 613 - short gen. as second compound part - still **OPEN**
* 619 - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails - still **OPEN**
* 627 - prefix + hyhpen does not get accepted - still **OPEN**
* 629 - *a* taking part in compounding without hyphen - still **OPEN**
* 634 - PropGen+hyph+PropGen - still **OPEN**
* 641 - numeral+noun compounds - still **OPEN**
* 642 - noun/adj/proper + hyphen + ain - still **OPEN**
* 644 - cased numeral+numeral compund - still **OPEN**
* 646 - adverb + hyphen + noun - still **OPEN**
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still **OPEN**
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still **OPEN**
* 649 - name + adj compound without hyphen - still **OPEN**
* 654 - speller does not recognize ordinals on -nuppelogát - still **OPEN**
* 655 - pron + nai - still **OPEN**
* 658 - Suggestion saame - still **OPEN**

### smj
Version: **Julevsáme, version 1.0.1, 2008-04-01**
* 435 - roman number - single letter numbers now recognised
    -      we should pregenerate all numbers once and for all, and store them in a
        separate lexicon file
    -      please note that *inflection* of single letter numerals is **fine** in
        `smj`, as opposed to `sme`
* 595 - prefix+name wihtout hyphen (*tsåhkeLot* instead of *tsåhke-Lot*) -
        still **OPEN**
* 600 - gen+hyph compound *sáme-dáro* - still **OPEN**
* 607 - acro + hyphen
***NRKGA* is acro + clitic accepted without colon - what is correct?
* 616 - Bispadime-me-ráden - still **OPEN**, try to find an acro or abbr *me*
* 619 - numerals and pronouns to NAMÁK and SASJ fails - still **OPEN**
* 629 - *a* taking part in compound - still **OPEN**
* 634 - rop gen + hyphen + Prop gen - still **OPEN**
* 641 - numeral+noun compounds - still **OPEN**
* 644 - cased numeral+numeral compund - still **OPEN**
* 647 - numerals+NOUN - still **OPEN**
* 648 - unmotivated suggestions with numeral+noun - still **OPEN**
* 649 - name + adj compound without hyphen - still **OPEN**
* 650 - noun prefix+name compound without hyphen - still **OPEN**
* 658 - Suggestion saame - still **OPEN**

**TODO:**
* compile new speller lexicons (**Tomi**)
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion (**Tomi**)

## Hyphenator bugs

Open issues based on test results :

### sme
Lexicon version: **Davvisámi, version 1.0.1, 2008-04-01**
* 468 - **REGRESSION:***Márkomeanu*
* 547 - **REGRESSION:** hyphen in front of vowel: *Lotnolasealáhusas*
* 548 - **REGRESSION:** mid syllable hyphenation: *Háliidivččen*
* 549 - **REGRESSION:** division without hyph: *Váccedettiin*
* 673 - adj-derivations: *guovttenuppelotčoarvvagiin* (the word is not rec.)
* 677 - **NEW:** Wrongly hyphenated ending -danidja - invalid

### smj
Lexicon version: **Julevsáme, version 1.0.1, 2008-04-01**
* 545 - **REGRESSION:** bad hyphenation in compounds: *åhpadusorganisásjåvnån*
         (not recognised)
* 546 - **REGRESSION:** obligatory hyph rules seem to work in facultative
        manner: *organisásjåvnån* (not recognised)
* 547 - **REGRESSION:** hyphen in front of vowel: *Jienastimnjuolgadusá* and
        *Orgánajs*

## InDesign tools

We're waiting for an update from Polderland.

## Releases

**TODO:**
* update the *Changes* document (**Sjur**)
* InDesign documentation (**Sjur**)
    - Norwegian translation received from Davvi Girji
* public hunspell beta during first week of May - depends on the hunspell devel.
* public 1.1 update of the Polderland-based tools during May

# Other

## Corpus contracts + open source

Now decided to wait until we have changed from `cvs` to `svn`.

TODO:
* publish corpus contracts and project infra as open-source on NoDaLi-sta
  (**Sjur**)

## Travel to Røros and Östersund

Done, results somewhat mixed, but overall it was quite useful.

# Next meeting, closing

The next meeting is 5.5.2008.

The meeting was closed at 11:10.

# Appendix - task lists for the next five days

## Boerre

* Hunspell lexicon conversion
* prepare migration to svn (with **Sjur, Trond**)
* release hunspell public beta at the end of April (with **Sjur**)
* review hunspell lexicon branch (with **Thomas**), merge with trunk if ok
* try to repair G5 accounts for iCal Server
* make a test-all target that runs all tests we have
* define and document testing routines
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Jovsset
* follow up on `sma` corpus texts

## Lene
* get the ped content ready
* Work on test routine with **Trond** and **Sjur**

## Maaren
* Put the list of possible `sma` corpus sources into a document

## Per-Eric

* try to find other authors who have `smj` texts digitaly.
* Work with missing list from texts written by Sigga Tuolja Sandström.
* Work with missing list same_dutkama_pgr.txt
* Work with missing list sameriekta_tjoahkkagæsos.txt
* Keep the contact with Ulf-Stefan Winka.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Saara
* add new XSL/XML headers for proofing test docs
* Set up ways of adding meta-information for proofing correct corpus docs
  (source info, used in testing or not, added to lexicon or not)
* implement the ped UI and functionality

## Sjur

* follow up on `sma` corpus texts
* name db/risten.no
* make an improved `sma` project plan
* publish corpus contracts and project infra as open-source on NoDaLi-sta
* prepare migration to svn (with **Børre, Trond**)
* release hunspell public beta at the end of April (with **Børre**)
* update the *Changes* document
* follow-up on some Polderland-related bugs: 621, 630, 652, 656
* test latest hunspell lexicon
* InDesign documentation
* send calendar info to Jovsset
* add CG regression test with **Lene** and **Trond**
* make a test-all target that runs all tests we have
* define and document testing routines
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Thomas

* look at test cases still not behaving properly
* review hunspell lexicon branch with **Børre**
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Tomi

* Hunspell lexicon conversion
* document how compounding is controlled in the PLX conversion
* fix double hyphen bugs
* Make a pedagogical speller (after MA thesis is delivered)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

## Trond

* Help Jovsset with vislcg3 and sma
* Set up Jabber for Lene, Kimme, Saara
* Prepare svn migration (with **Sjur, Børre**)
* Work on test routine with **Lene** and **Sjur**
* make a test-all target that runs all tests we have
* define and document testing routines
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
