# Meeting setup

* Date: 16.01.2006
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are :-)
* Tools: iChat, SubEthaEdit

#  Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from two weeks ago
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. name lexicon infrastructure
1. Other issues
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 09:45.

Present: **Børre, Maaren, Saara, Sjur, Trond**

Absent: **Thomas, Tomi** (sick leave until Jan. 17th)

Main secretary: **Trond**

Agenda accepted as is.

# 2. Reviewing the task list from the last meeting

##  Børre
* Gather public texts, preferrably also parallel ones
* Contact Odin editor (**Ove Sæth**) to ask for source (and parallel) documents
    -  Waiting for Trond
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
* review code and documentation for corpus xsl files under version control
* make an XML test lexicon for our new name lexicon; format is based on the
  latest meeting memo
    -  Some work done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Maaren
* work with risten.no
**done
* review corpus usage documentation, and the usage of the corpus
**not done, do not know where to find it. Can`t read my emails...sorry....
* discuss with relevant people regarding seminar on proofing tools, normativity
  and SGL in February/March, including place.
**done. Possible in February or at the beg. of March

##  Saara
* Convert the name lexicon from present format to xml for testing; final
  conversion pending the editing fascilities
    - Script is ready, the test conversion will be done today.
* continue discussion on the new lexicon format
* Refine language detection for Finnish
    - not done
* Finnish the review of the hyphenation detection.
    - not done
* Review the handling of xsl-files in corpus infrastructure, including version
  control
    - work in progress. the updating xsl-files and cgi-infrastructure will be 
finished this week, the final testing during the meeting week.
* Do some testing for bug
  [#211](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=211)
    - not done
* xml2lexc update to handle complex names: construct entries like we have now
  from the different parts of a complex name entry
    - not done
* update preprocess to handle inflected forms of complex names
    - done but needs to be optimized.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* Follow up the lawyer treatment of the contracts
    - done
* Plan the forthcoming seminar
    - nothing but the dates and place
* Lule Sámi twol problems, with **Thomas** and **Trond**
* follow up on voice group-chat not working to Sámediggi
    - Test Marratech when the new Marratech server is in place
* project planning with **Trond**, continued
    - also look at the development processes - specification and  testing
* Follow up on place names from Norge Digitalt
    - write an e-mail to or call **Bjørn Olav Megard**
* Evaluate SFST as speller (and analyzer) lexicon
    - more thorough analysis than was possible in Guovdageaidnu
* write a background document on the corpus contracts
* continue proper name lexicon work and discussion
* public tender:
    - received offer for handling the whole process from [Finnut
   Consult AS|http://www.finnut.no/]
* follow up new server - it's not delivered yet
    - it was delivered Friday afternoon
* smj G3 issue with **Thomas** and **Trond**
* sme G3 issue with **Thomas** and **Trond**
* call EDD/**Christian Emil Ore** about national place name lexicon
    - tried calling him several times, but he has been ill, I've started on an
   e-mail to him instead
* risten.no/name lexicon development: fix bugs, continue development
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
* various:
    - commented a letter from **Hallgeir Varsi** to SD, regarding the amount of
   work needed on our side to support the Kvensk project
    - wrote monthly reports for November, December

##  Thomas
Sick leave.

##  Tomi
Sick leave.

##  Trond
* Contact Odin editor (**Ove Sæth**) to reopen contacts
    - Forgot it.
* Plan the forthcoming seminar
    - Private thoughts, yes, must now flesh them out.
* sign contract with Bibelselskapet for Norwegian parallel texts
    - Not done.
* project planning with **Sjur**, continued
    - Not done.
* smj G3 issue with **Sjur** and **Thomas**
    - Not done.
* sme G3 issue with **Sjur** and **Thomas**
    - Not done.
* document corpus infrastructure, your part
    - Not done.
* review corpus usage documentation (ccat)
    - Not done.
* discuss the new lexicon format in the newsgroup
    - Not done.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - Not done.
* This revision was not too impressive, instead I have worked on disambiguation.

# 3. Documentation

## Reviews

Add documentation on our corpus infrastructure and our corpus work in general
(**Børre**, **Tomi**, **Trond**). For the basic corpora, we need 2
additional types of documentation, or doc for 2 target groups:

1. For the **users/linguists:** What corpus are found, how do I use them (this
  info is now scattered) 
  (Part of the HOWTO USE is documented in the catxml docu, 
  what documents are found where etc + an overall documentation is not
  written, since the corpus is so sparsely populated)
    1. catxml done, which is what is needed mostly. Do we need more?
    1. Review: **Thomas, Maaren, Linda, Ilona, Trond**

**Saara** will update the user documentation, and add new if necessary. We will
do the review as part of the meeting next week.

Findings so far:
Basic text presentation works fine, but the text-type options does not.

# 4. Corpus gathering

## Contracts

Ready - start using them!

## Collecting

List of people/organisations/companies to contact to be found in an [old meeting
memo|/admin/weekly/2005/Meeting_2005-09-05.html#5.+Corpus+gathering]. Based
on those, here's an updated list:

1. Anders Kintel (**Børre**)
1. Newspaper text:
    1. Sámi Instituhtta's (for the old archive of Min Áigi and Áššu) (**Børre**)
    1. Áššu has been making a CD since the end of May, there should be a pile
   there. **Børre** suggests that they send us the CDs they have, so that we
   may look at them, and ensure that the routines work, and that we are
   able to utilize their format. (**Børre**)
    1. Min Áigi (**Børre**)
1. Commercially published texts
    1. Iđut and key authors there (**Børre**)
    1. Davvi Girji and key authors there (**Børre**)
    1. Author organisations' meetings (**Børre**)
    1. Key authors one by one
        1. (list of author names) Kerttu Vuolab, Kirsi Paltto, ...

List of texts with lower priority (to be gathered when the above list is
more or less fixed)
* the Sámi municipalities, 
* Authors with smaller production
* Textbooks

TODO: a *lot* for **Børre!**

## Odin

We want both parallell and errouneous (unproofed) text files. What we need is a
direct contact with Odin, in order to have as good coverage as possible.

TODO: **Trond**, and then **Børre** to call **Ove Sæth** to re-establish 
contact. 

### Bible texts

We have received Norwegian texts and a contract draft from Bibelselskapet, in 
essence requiring a separate contract for internet use of extracts of the text. 
The texts are in the paratext format, an international standard for the bible in
electronic form. Most translations are available in this format.

TODO: **Trond** will accept the contract as is, and then negotiate a separate
contract with them for use with the online, searchable parallel corpus when it
is ready.

# 5. Corpus infrastructure

Task list:
1. Include the xsl files under version control
    1. RCS version control is almost finished, but an issue with access control is
   still open. Discussed a bit in the meeting, but nothing conclusive. We'll
   continue the discussion in the newsgroup.
1. Incorporate language detection as part of the corpus processing (**Saara**)
    1. Almost finished. Needs improved Finnish language model - presently it isn't
   able to distinguish Finnish from Sámi (proving the family bonds:-)
1. we need to review whether only automatic hyphen detection is good enough, or
  whether manual post-processing in some form is needed. Delayed until we have
  some results to base the review on.
    1. Acceptable results: 90% of all real hyphens correctly tagged.
1. CGI-admin script to add xsl-file to a corpus file that doesn't have one 
  (**Tomi**)
    1. **Saara** will review the existing code, consult **Tomi**, and try to make
   a script to help **Børre** utilize the template and the infra in place.

We will have a major review of all these things next week.

# 6. Linguistics

## North Sámi

* three-part compounds issue still open
    - Thomas is finished with three-part compounds for North Sámi. 
        - compilation time has increased to 10m for the sme parser
    as a whole. This is probably linked to the three-part issue, but we are not 
    sure about that.
        - it overgenerates wildly. This is bad for several of our applications.
    - compound shortening issue is waiting for the SGL to make a normative decision
        - we have to wait until SGL´s meeting protocol (???) is ready
    - linguistic analysis/discussion to continue in the newsgroup
    - we should include the members-to-be of the Sámi Giellalávdegoddi (SGL) in
   this discussion, but how? We need a common meeting / normativity seminar /
   seminar on proofing issues and on language technology in a broader sense with
   them. Then we also need to open the linguistic issues newsgroup we talked
   about earlier, and set up their computers and teach them to use the
   newsgroup. This seminar needs to include the Lule Sámi section of SGL (others
   are welcome too).
        - Laila has informed the members of the SGL about this. This is very okei -
    open the linguistic issues newsgroup for the 
    members of SGL, but we have to know how to do it. Seminar also very okei, 
    but we have to wait until the new SGL is elected.
    - Timetable:
        - The Sámediggiráđđi is going to appoint new members in January
    (**Johan Mikkel Saara** is asking people)
        - not done yet, perhaps this week
        - Contact the SGL when it is elected, and ask them to arrange a
    normativity seminar, with invited keypersons. Have to wait until it is
     elected. Initially we planned for February, but it is too early, because
     SGL is not elected yet. Divvun wants the seminar as early as possible.
* number project still open (see below)
* diphthong simplification/G3 issue should be carried over from Lule Sámi.
    - TODO: 
        - **Trond, Thomas and Sjur** to discuss this this month.
        - Writing the rules (copy from smj, adjust) (**Sjur, Thomas** and **Trond**)
        - Bug 77 - clearify whether *háliid* is acceptable - it is found, thus we
    need to be able to analyse it, but only as !SUB:

## Lule Sámi

Open tasks:
* Derived G3 that looks like G2 are still open. 
    - **Thomas, Trond and Sjur** should meet again to finish the rest.

## Numerals

The following North Sámi linguistic issues should be settled before going into
the numeral project:

1. Three-part compounds
1. Diphthong simplification
1. Derivation

These issues are recently done in Lule Sámi, and it is more efficient to
complete them in North Sámi directly thereafter instead of beginning a new topic

Numeral treatment is on different level in the existing sme and smj parsers, but
the issue itself is common to the two langauges, and should therefore be treated
in parallel.

Numerals in North Sámi:
Inventory is listed elsewhere.

Numerals in Lule Sámi:
There are 70 lines of code setting up the structure for case inflection of basic
numerals.

# 7. Name lexicon infrastructure

## Complex names

Task list for this issue:

* make sure xml2lexc can handle complex names in ways compatible with our
  present tool chain (=reconstruct the lexc format we have now) (**Saara**)
    - **Tomi** is working on a C++ version of the xml2lexc tool. He will put it
   into CVS soon (it is actually catxml, can easily be adopted to the xml2lexc
   requirements)
* the resulting file format should be identical to our present prop-name
  file (=lexc), that can then be converted to our new xml format using the same
  script as for the regular names (**Tomi** or **Saara**, but only when the
  technical details are settled)
* The core issue: The preprocess script can handle uninflected (A + B)
  compounds, but not (A + inflected B). **Saara** will add the analyzer as part
  of the preprocess, to be able to handle inflected cases as well.

## XML format

We had our meeting, and the result was pretty close to the structure of the
existing risten.no term base. Now the conversion script to xml needs to be
updated. The new format is documented in the newsgroup.

Tasks:
1. make a test lexicon for evaluating the format, set up the editing, and test it
  (**Saara**)
1. update conversion from lexc to xml to reflect new xml format (**Saara**)
    1. mostly done, some open questions left
1. testing of conversion
1. continue the discussion of the name lexicon format
  (**Saara, Tomi, Sjur, Trond**)
1. implement a prototype in eXist
1. eXist as editor:
    1. develop the needed XQueries and interface
    1. synchronisation between risten.no and 
    1. test whether eXist as editor is actually working well

# 8. Other

## SGL Seminar

* SGL/normativity seminar
    -  all members = potentially/likely all languages
        - not all languages, only North Sámi
    -  date? As early as possible, end of February/beginning of March
    -  place? **Maaren** will investigate

## Divvun/Disamb Seminar in Tromsø

* project meeting
    -  date: 23. (after lunch) - 27. (Friday is travelling day) januar.
    -  place: Tromsø
    -  still too many open questions regarding place+date, to be determined in a
    separate meeting later this week, when all are available.

Maaren is able to attend Monday morning and Tuesday (all day)
Sjur will probably arrive in Tromsø at lunchtime Monday (7.25 from HKI, TOS at 
11.00). **Trond** will check with Linda and Ilona, trying to have a Meeting
startup after lunch on Monday.
Saara will stay one day shorter/less, remember to adjust the schedule 
accordingly

Practical arrangements:
* room(s): One big room for all, with internet access, and at least one 
  additional room, with whiteboards or similar and projector.
* lunch & coffee breaks, think of how to arrange this.
* hotel = Grand Hotel/Polar Hotel, Grønnegata, Scandic is close to the 
  University
    - **Sjur** will check which ones are acceptable to SD
    - these need rooms at the hotel: Ilona, Saara, Linda, Sjur, Maaren

Suggested content for project meeting:

* Common
    - Presentation, kick-off
    - Project updates
    - Project milestones
    - Cooperation evaluation (practical/daily cooperation)
        - project management
        - programmer work
        - linguistic work
        - anything else?

* Divvun
    - Project milestones
    - Evaluation/feedback
    - public tender meeting

* Disamb
    - Project milestones
    - Tagsets (Evaluating and fixing (?) the tagset for the disambiguator)

* Linguists
    - G3 smj/sme
    - Compilation time and twol ruleset
    - Numeral project
    - spelling errors (esp. in risten.no)
    - Routines for addition to lexicon, cooperation wrt. new corpus texts coming in

* Programmers
    - Proper names:
        - xml
        - eXist/editing
    - Work distribution (in bug fixing, documentation, maintenance etc.)
    - Parallel corpora and the corpus infrastructure
    - xml2lexc implementation plan

Teaching sessions (list of free thoughts and personal frustrations).
There must be one teacher and at least two pupils before we run a course.
* How to use the xml corpora (all? more like a group review session - 1h)
* Use of Xerox tools (t: Trond; p: RTFW)
* Twig (t: Saara; p: Trond)
* XQuery/XSL (t: Sjur/Tomi(?); p: Trond, Børre, Saara)
* xml webapp development, security and session integrity (group work: p: Sjur,
  Børre, Tomi, Saara)
* file-specific xsl scripts for corpus conversions, the what, how and who issues
  (t: Saara/Tomi; p: Trond, Børre, Sjur)

Final schedule to be worked out by **Trond** and **Sjur** (Tuesday 10 AM?).
The above plan will be copied to a separate document which will become the
starting point for further work on the seminar planning.

## Technical issues

* The mac os / perl bug (at least **Trond** and **Sjur** has it, [Bugzilla
  #211|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=211]):
    - utf8 "\xC4" does not map to Unicode at /Users/trond/gt/script/preprocess line
   82. This msg did not show up in 10.3 (perl 5.8.1), but does so in 10.4 (perl
   5.8.6). It is probably a perl - OS mismatch. (**Trond**, **Saara**,
   **Tomi**)
        - 10.4 introduced support for locales in the shell (10.3 and earlier didn't
    know about locales)
    - Test: the result of the last line should indicate whether this is a problem
   in cat or a Perl/OS mismatch.

```
   preprocess file_name.txt OK
   cat file_name.txt | preprocess !!
   catxml file_name.xml | preprocess ??
```

After some heavy investigation, we got no further. There is no difference
between different bash versions (2.0x, 3.0x), neither between different locales
as long as they are UTF-8, and whether it is stored in LANG or LC_ALL.

One new insight though: both cat and print gives the same errors, thus
indicating that the error is NOT strictly reltated to cat. Is it after all a
conflict between the locale support in OS X and perl?

## Bug fixing

**29** open bugs (and 25 risten.no bugs)

## C implementation of preprocess.pl

Do we want to have a C/C++ implementation for speed reasons? Is it going to be
included in the spellers?

# 9. Summary, task list

##  Børre
* send out contracts with accompanying letter
* Gather public texts, preferrably also parallel ones
* Contact Odin editor (**Ove Sæth**) to ask for source (and parallel) documents
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
* review code and documentation for corpus xsl files under version control
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Maaren
* work with risten.no
* discuss with relevant people regarding seminar on proofing tools, normativity
  and SGL in February/March, including place.

##  Saara
* Convert the name lexicon from present format to xml for testing; final
  conversion pending the editing fascilities
* continue discussion on the new lexicon format
* Refine language detection for Finnish
* Finnish the review of the hyphenation detection.
* Review the handling of xsl-files in corpus infrastructure, including version
  control
* Do some testing for bug
  [#211](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=211)
* optimize the preprocess script
* Write/update user documentation for the corpus usage in preparation for the
  review in the project meetings next week.
* finalize an improved working version of the CGI and command line scripts for
  corpus additions
* xml2lexc update to handle complex names: construct entries like we have now
  from the different parts of a complex name entry
* update conversion from lexc to xml (proper names) with the latest refinements
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* Follow up the lawyer treatment of the contracts
* Project seminar
    - plan and make schedule with **Trond**
    - check which hotels SD has an agreement with
    - plan XQuery/XSLT training session
* Lule Sámi twol problems, with **Thomas** and **Trond**
* follow up on voice group-chat not working to Sámediggi
    - Test Marratech when the new Marratech server is in place
* project planning with **Trond**, continued
    - also look at the development processes - specification and  testing
* Follow up on place names from Norge Digitalt
    - write an e-mail to or call **Bjørn Olav Megard**
* Evaluate SFST as speller (and analyzer) lexicon
    - more thorough analysis than was possible in Guovdageaidnu
* write a background document on the corpus contracts
* check for SD feedback on the last two contracts (2 & 3)
* continue proper name lexicon work and discussion
* public tender:
    - review offer from [Finnut Consult AS](http://www.finnut.no/)
* smj G3 issue with **Thomas** and **Trond**
* sme G3 issue with **Thomas** and **Trond**
* call EDD/**Christian Emil Ore** about national place name lexicon
* risten.no/name lexicon development: fix bugs, continue development
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Thomas
* work on North Sámi compounding and derivation
* review corpus usage documentation
* smj G3 issue with **Sjur** and **Trond**
* sme G3 issue with **Sjur** and **Trond**

##  Tomi
* Aspell: Continue working on the affix file & aspell
    - Contact aspell author (UTF-8 thing)
* corpus infrastructure:
    - dtd location (both public and internal)
    - cgi-admin script for adding xsl-files
* Document aspell and corpus infrastructure
* Specification for new catxml in C++
    - install and announce new ccat tool
* new proper name lexicon
    - remove last part of complex names not used as simplex names
    - start looking at conversion of the name lexicon from present format to xml
    - discuss the new lexicon format in the newsgroup
    - Look into synchronisation of proper names with risten.no
    - meeting to arrive at final xml format
    - new version of xml2lexc (based on catxml, now ccat)
* hyphenation in corpus docs
* comment review template made by **Saara**
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
* pick up backpacks after Xmas

##  Trond
* Contact Odin editor (**Ove Sæth**) immediately to reopen contacts
* Project seminar
    - plan and make schedule with **Sjur**
    - check with Linda and Ilona whether we can start on Monday after lunch
* sign contract with Bibelselskapet for Norwegian parallel texts
* document corpus infrastructure, your part
* review corpus usage documentation (ccat)
* discuss the new lexicon format in the newsgroup
* smj G3 issue with **Sjur** and **Thomas**
* sme G3 issue with **Sjur** and **Thomas**
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

# 10. Next meeting, closing

30.01.2006 09:30

Closed at 11:43
