# Meeting setup

* Date: 30.01.2006
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are :-)
* Tools: iChat, SubEthaEdit

#  Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from two weeks ago
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. name lexicon infrastructure
1. Other issues
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 09:48.

Present: **Børre, Sjur, Tomi, Trond**

Absent: **Maaren, Saara, Thomas**

Main secretary: **Børre**

Agenda accepted as is.

# 2. Reviewing the task list from the last meeting

##  Børre
* send out contracts with accompanying letter
    -  Not done
* Gather public texts, preferrably also parallel ones
    -  Not done
* Contact Odin editor (**Ove Sæth**) to ask for source (and parallel) documents
    -  Done
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
    -  Not done
* review code and documentation for corpus xsl files under version control
    -  Not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    -  Not done

##  Maaren
* work with risten.no
* discuss with relevant people regarding seminar on proofing tools, normativity
  and SGL in February/March, including place.

##  Saara
* Convert the name lexicon from present format to xml for testing; final
  conversion pending the editing fascilities
    - done
* Refine language detection for Finnish
    - not done
* Finish the review of the hyphenation detection.
    - not done
* Review the handling of xsl-files in corpus infrastructure, including version
  control
    - in progress
* Do some testing for bug
  [#211](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=211)
    - not done
* optimize the preprocess script
    - not done
* Write/update user documentation for the corpus usage in preparation for the
  review in the project meetings next week.
    - done
* finalize an improved working version of the CGI and command line scripts for
  corpus additions
    - in progress
* xml2lexc update to handle complex names: construct entries like we have now
  from the different parts of a complex name entry
    - tomi will do the xml2lexc-script(?)
* update conversion from lexc to xml (proper names) with the latest
refinements
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* Follow up the lawyer treatment of the contracts
    - not done
* Project seminar
    - plan and make schedule with **Trond**
        - done
    - check which hotels SD has an agreement with
        - done
    - plan XQuery/XSLT training session
        - done
        - the whole seminar is done
* Lule Sámi twol problems, with **Thomas** and **Trond**
    - not done
* follow up on voice group-chat not working to Sámediggi
    - Test Marratech when the new Marratech server is in place
        - not done
* project planning with **Trond**, continued
    - also look at the development processes - specification and  testing
        - not done
* Follow up on place names from Norge Digitalt
    - write an e-mail to or call **Bjørn Olav Megard**
        - not done
* Evaluate SFST as speller (and analyzer) lexicon
    - more thorough analysis than was possible in Guovdageaidnu
        - not done
* write a background document on the corpus contracts
    - not done
* continue proper name lexicon work and discussion
    - done a lot at the seminar
* public tender:
    - review offer from [Finnut Consult AS](http://www.finnut.no/)
        - done, as well as asked for two other offers, then picked one (Finnut), and
    had a meeting with them, planning the whole PT process
* smj G3 issue with **Thomas** and **Trond**
    - not done
* sme G3 issue with **Thomas** and **Trond**
    - not done
* call EDD/**Christian Emil Ore** about national place name lexicon
    - not done
* risten.no/name lexicon development: fix bugs, continue development
    - done some, backed up and restarted the server; the backup isn't completely
   valid, due to some strange bug/conflict between the version on the server
   and the version of the client. The XML files are ok though.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Thomas
On sick leave

##  Tomi
* Aspell: Continue working on the affix file & aspell
    - Contact aspell author (UTF-8 thing)
        - Not done
* corpus infrastructure:
    - dtd location (both public and internal)
        - Not done
    - cgi-admin script for adding xsl-files
        - Not done
* Document aspell and corpus infrastructure
    - Not done
* Specification for new catxml in C++
    - install and announce new ccat tool
        - Done
* new proper name lexicon
    - remove last part of complex names not used as simplex names
        - Not done
    - start looking at conversion of the name lexicon from present format to xml
        - Not done
    - discuss the new lexicon format in the newsgroup
        - Not done
    - Look into synchronisation of proper names with risten.no
        - Not done
    - meeting to arrive at final xml format
        - Participated the meeting
    - new version of xml2lexc (based on catxml, now ccat)
        - Not done
* hyphenation in corpus docs
    - Not done, but has **Saara** done it? Sjur: yes.
* comment review template made by **Saara**
    - Not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - Not done
* pick up backpacks after Xmas
    - Done

##  Trond
* Contact Odin editor (**Ove Sæth**) immediately to reopen contacts
    - Done.
* Project seminar
    - plan and make schedule with **Sjur**
    - Done.
    - check with Linda and Ilona whether we can start on Monday after lunch
    - Done.
* sign contract with Bibelselskapet for Norwegian parallel texts
    - Done.
* document corpus infrastructure, your part
* review corpus usage documentation (ccat)
    - Done.
* discuss the new lexicon format in the newsgroup
    - Done, but not extensively.
* smj G3 issue with **Sjur** and **Thomas**
    - Not done
* sme G3 issue with **Sjur** and **Thomas**
    - Not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - I think we made some progress on some of the number bugs, but we haven't 
   looked at the bugzilla base yet.

# 3. Documentation

## Reviews

### ccat review

**Saara, Linda, Ilona, Trond**

Conducted the review as part of the seminar, although Thomas and Maaren weren't
there. Outcome:

It works mostly as documented, a few glitches were found and corrected. The
documentation is *terse* but concise (simple is beautiful, that is, in full
accordance to KISS). ccat -h gives:

```
        -a              Print all text elements.
        -p              Print plain paragraphs. (default)
        -T              Print paragraphs with title type.
        -L              Print paragraphs with list type.
        -t              Print paragraphs with table type.
        -r <dir>        Recursively process directory dir and subdirs enountered.
        -h              Print this help message.
```

* (Trond:) I thought that -T printed titles, but it gave the same output as -a.
* (Tomi:) No, it gave you all regular paragraphs + titles, but no tables or 
lists. The latest version will give you *only* titles, lists, etc according 
to the specified option.
* (Sjur:) I would like a -v option, so we are able to identify which version to 
send a bug report for :-) The version number should be autoincremented on each
CVS check-in/build, or manually set?

The [[xml-based documentation](/ling/catxml.html) was not completely
up-to-date with the latest changes, fixed in the meeting.

## Other documentation

* **Børre**: Informed about the forrest documentation: the documentation tree
structure, how to add documents and get them into the menu.

# 4. Corpus gathering

Discussed briefly how the formalities should be implemented: signature, Websak,
posting etc.

## Collecting

See the [previous meeting memo](Meeting_2006-01-16) for what's to be done.

TODO: Still a *lot* for **Børre!**

## Odin

DONE: **Trond**, and then **Børre** to call **Ove Sæth** to re-establish 
contact. 

**Sæth** to discuss with colleagues about how to implement the cooperation.

## Bible texts

```
ccat -t zcorp/gt/sme/bible/ot/1Mos_09-01.doc.xml | less
```

This gives everything.
What we want is to make a file-specific version of testament.xml, with these
properties:
* The first column should be suppressed
* The second column should be marked number or something
* The third column should be marked header if the typographic code in the fist
  column indicates it is a header (1 or 3) and it should be marked text if the
  typographic code indicates it is text (is 5).
```
sme$ls zcorp/orig/sme/bible/ot/
1Mos_09-01.doc  Salmmat-_garvasat_0203.doc
```
There are two new books in the paratext format waiting in the nob orig and nno
orig directories.

TODO:
* write a paratext2xml converter
* convert smj NT to paratext
* ask to get fin and swe NT and OT in paratext format

We already have an embryonic converter: gt/script/testament.xsl
Usage: xsltproc /path/to/testament.xsl bible-text.xml > converted-text.xml 
format.

# 5. Corpus infrastructure

Task list:
1. Include the xsl files under version control
    1. RCS version control is almost finished, but an issue with access control is
   still open. Discussed a bit in the meeting, but nothing conclusive. We'll
   continue the discussion in the newsgroup.
1. Incorporate language detection as part of the corpus processing (**Saara**)
    1. Almost finished. Needs improved Finnish language model - presently it isn't
   able to distinguish Finnish from Sámi (proving the family bonds:-)
1. we need to review whether only automatic hyphen detection is good enough, or
  whether manual post-processing in some form is needed. Delayed until we have
  some results to base the review on.
    1. Acceptable results: 90% of all real hyphens correctly tagged.
1. CGI-admin script to add xsl-file to a corpus file that doesn't have one 
  (**Saara**)

Things are moving forward, but still more work to do. The list is left as is.

# 6. Linguistics

Nothing today, our linguists are on sick leave or not participating. For the
tasks and their status, see the [previous meeting memo](Meeting_2006-01-16).

# 7. Name lexicon infrastructure

## Complex names

Task list for this issue:

* make sure xml2lexc can handle complex names in ways compatible with our
  present tool chain (=reconstruct the lexc format we have now) (**Tomi**)
    - the resulting file format should be identical to our present prop-name
   file (=lexc), that can then be converted to our new xml format using the same
   script as for the regular names (**Tomi** or **Saara**, but only when the
   technical details are settled)
* **Saara** has added the analyzer as part
  of the preprocess, but it is slow, and needs to be optimized.

## XML format

Tasks:
1. make a test lexicon for evaluating the format, set up the editing, and test it
  (**Saara**)
    1. Done
1. update conversion from lexc to xml to reflect new xml format (**Saara**)
    1. mostly done, some open questions left
1. testing of conversion
1. eXist as editor:
    1. develop the needed XQueries and interface
    1. synchronisation between risten.no and 
    1. test whether eXist as editor is actually working well

# 8. Other

## SGL Seminar

* SGL/normativity seminar
    -  all members = potentially/likely all languages
        - not all languages, only North Sámi
    -  date? As early as possible, end of February/beginning of March
    -  place? **Maaren** will investigate

## Technical issues

* The mac os / perl bug (at least **Trond** and **Sjur** has it, [Bugzilla
  #211|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=211]):
    - utf8 "\xC4" does not map to Unicode at /Users/trond/gt/script/preprocess line
   82. This msg did not show up in 10.3 (perl 5.8.1), but does so in 10.4 (perl
   5.8.6). It is probably a perl - OS mismatch. (**Trond**, **Saara**,
   **Tomi**)
        - 10.4 introduced support for locales in the shell (10.3 and earlier didn't
    know about locales)
    - Test: the result of the last line should indicate whether this is a problem
   in cat or a Perl/OS mismatch.
    - Is this a problem with ccat?
        - It doesn't seem so (3 min and still counting)
        - In the end, the bug turned up with ccat as well. I gave the command:
        - zcorp/gt/sme/*/*xml | preprocess --abbr=bin/abbr.txt | lookup -flags
    mbTT -utf8 bin/sme.fst | lookup2cg | vislcg --grammar=src/sme-dis.rle
    --minimal | sort | less
        - and it (in the end) responded: 
```
1729 constraint rules
utf8 "\xA1" does not map to Unicode at /home/trond/gt/script/preprocess line 109, <> chunk 12.
```

To ccat's defence I must say that cat, in a similar situation, would have given far
more error messages (hold on, testing still under way).

```
   preprocess file_name.txt - OK
   cat file_name.txt | preprocess - bug!!
   catxml file_name.xml | preprocess - ??
   ccat filename | preprocess - bug !!
```

This bug isn't a high priority any more, because ccat behaves differently than
cat, and because there is the possibility of avoiding cat when working locally.

BUG: close as Won't fix.

## Bug fixing

**30** open bugs (and 25 risten.no bugs)

## Norwegian ispell press release

The i18n section of Skolelinux plans a press release including a paragraph
about our project. We will ask them to reformulate a couple of things, and
remove the links they've included. Text submitted to them:

* Dette er den eneste kilden til retteprogram for norsk uavhengig av Microsoft,
  bl.a. det som brukes av Apple.

* Et separat prosjekt ved Sametinget er i gang for å utvikle samiske
  retteprogram, bl a for Linux. Se http://www.divvun.no for mer info.

# 9. Summary, task list

##  Børre
* send out contracts with accompanying letter
* Gather public texts, preferrably also parallel ones
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
* review code and documentation for corpus xsl files under version control
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Maaren
* work with risten.no
* discuss with relevant people regarding seminar on proofing tools, normativity
  and SGL in February/March, including place.

##  Saara
* continue discussion on the new lexicon format
* Refine language detection for Finnish
* Finnish the review of the hyphenation detection.
* Review the handling of xsl-files in corpus infrastructure, including version
  control
* Do some testing for bug
  [#211](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=211)
* Fix the preprocess script and optimize it by building an analyzator
  for the multi-part expressions. 
* finalize an improved working version of the CGI and command line scripts for
  corpus additions
* update conversion from lexc to xml (proper names) with the latest refinements
* Try to add numeral treatment as part of the analyzator.
* Change character coding detection to paragraph-based.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* Follow up the lawyer treatment of the contracts
* Lule Sámi twol problems, with **Thomas** and **Trond**
* follow up on voice group-chat not working to Sámediggi
    - Test Marratech when the new Marratech server is in place
* project planning with **Trond**, continued
    - also look at the development processes - specification and  testing
* Follow up on place names from Norge Digitalt
    - write an e-mail to or call **Bjørn Olav Megard**
* Evaluate SFST as speller (and analyzer) lexicon
    - more thorough analysis than was possible in Guovdageaidnu
* write a background document on the corpus contracts
* continue proper name lexicon work and discussion
* public tender:
    - review offer from [Finnut Consult AS](http://www.finnut.no/)
* smj G3 issue with **Thomas** and **Trond**
* sme G3 issue with **Thomas** and **Trond**
* call EDD/**Christian Emil Ore** about national place name lexicon
* risten.no/name lexicon development: fix bugs, continue development
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Thomas
* work on North Sámi compounding and derivation
* review corpus usage documentation
* smj G3 issue with **Sjur** and **Trond**
* sme G3 issue with **Sjur** and **Trond**

##  Tomi
* Aspell: Continue working on the affix file & aspell
    - Contact aspell author (UTF-8 thing)
* corpus infrastructure:
    - dtd location (both public and internal)
    - cgi-admin script for adding xsl-files
* Document aspell and corpus infrastructure
* ccat: add a -v option - it should return the version of the tool
* new proper name lexicon
    - remove last part of complex names not used as simplex names
    - start looking at conversion of the name lexicon from present format to xml
    - discuss the new lexicon format in the newsgroup
    - Look into synchronisation of proper names with risten.no
    - new version of xml2lexc (based on catxml, now ccat)
        - xml2lexc update to handle complex names: construct entries like we have now
    from the different parts of a complex name entry
* comment review template made by **Saara**
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Trond
* Work on corpus texts with Børre.
* 3-part compounds with  **Sjur** and **Thomas**.
* smj G3 issue with **Sjur** and **Thomas**.
* sme G3 issue with **Sjur** and **Thomas**.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

# 10. Next meeting, closing

06.02.2006 09:30

Closed at 12:03
