# Meeting setup

* Date: 02.10.2006
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Where we are
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat

# Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from two weeks ago
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. name lexicon infrastructure
1. Spellers
1. Other issues
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 09:39.

Present: **Børre, Saara, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi**

Absent: **Maaren, Trond**

Agenda accepted as is.

# 2. Updated task status since last meeting

##  Børre
* corpus collection:
    - contact **Ája** (Kåfjord), talk to **Lene**
        - Got documents from Lene
    - send contracts to **Čálliid Lágádus**
        - Done
    - contact **Richard Valkepää** at NSI about older Min Áigi and Áššu files
        - Not done
* Move norwegian documents in Min Áigi from sme to nob
    - Will have to check for other folders than 2003 ...
* corpus access:
    - possibly deploy the user account form as an HTML form
    - Write both user and admin documentation (**Børre**, review: **Sjur, Thomas**)
        - Not done
* set up Bugzilla automatic reminders for open issues
    - Not done
* finish Forrest i18n and Sámi in PDF work
    - Some more done
* Get more `sma, smj` texts to improve language recognition
    - Got lots of texts from Stig Gælok
* set up Tomcat for use with eXist and the propnouns db on the G5
    - not done
* add the new *Words* section to the site
    - Not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - None fixed this week
* Fixed a computer for Thomas

##  Maaren
* download and install latest Marratech

##  Saara
* Create a parallel corpora of the new testaments
* add more texts to the graphical corpus interface
* Implement parallel corpus upload in web upload script
    - I'll add this to the bug db.
* remove headers and footers from pdf documents
    - the documents with multiple columns still not ready
* Implement server of the analysis tools.
    - not yet ready
* generate parallel corpus files manually (with **Trond**)
    - the routines are mostly done.
* Improve text_cat
    - the new language models are still not done.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* finish the hyphenator clean-up script
    - done, but still too much output because we're using circular transducers
* name lexicon:
    - implement editing functions
        - waiting for the item below to be finished
    - finalise refactoring for multiple collections
        - search interface ready and converted to the new code for SD-terms
        - will add basic searching for the other collections as well, to demonstrate
    and test
    - implement improvements decided upon in Tromsø
* review user and admin documentation for corpus access
* write user account form, probably ask for copy of existing ones from the IT
  centre (with Trond)
* start hiring process of linguist and programmer
    - nothing done last week, tried to move substantially forward with the name db
   and the required changes to risten.no
* finish i18n work of Forrest
    - what was done is now working completely as it should
    - but finishing it turned out to be not so simple because it needs to work with
   the command-line client (CLI). And that one has no knowledge of locales and
   how to handle them.
* consider the problems of lexicalised derivations schewing analyses of
  derivation patterns
    - awaits M4-implementation in Disamb
* install eXist and our local copy of risten.no and propnouns on the G5
    - nothing
* speller follow-up from the Tromsø meeting
    - done, planning and code design has started
* get instructions on how to use Marratech, and test it
    - talked briefly with **Leif Åge**, asked him to push **Geir** or **Roy;**
   nothing received
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Thomas
* work with Polderland phonetic rules
    - soon finished
* bug-fixing!
    - worked some
* refine smj proper noun lexica, cf. the propernoun-smj-lex.txt
    - begun to look at it
* review user documentation for corpus access
    - not done
* find and study all derived verbs in our corpus (depends on **Trond**)
    - not done
* suggest which derivations could be generated (depends on **Trond**)
    - not done
* meeting with **Trond** Wednesday on `smj` proper nouns
    - we did meet

##  Tomi
* new proper name lexicon
    - data synchronisation of proper nouns between risten.no and CVS
        - not done
    - XQuery refactoring and code development for our proper noun editor
        - not done
    - new version of xml2lexc (based on ccat), should handle complex names correct:
   construct entries like we have now from the different parts of a complex name
   entry
        - partly
    - implement improvements decided upon in Tromsø
        - not done
* export corpus tools to `/opt` (with cron)
    - not done
* make speller make targets using M4
    - not done
* start to plan the implementation of the speller data conversion/generation
    - started
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Trond
* better smj NT text
    - Will give our .doc text a second try with Børre.
* get fin, swe, nob and nno NT and OT in **paratext** format
* fst gymnastics to add hyphenation and word boundary marks to hyphenation
  transducer
    - We use Sjur and Saara's perl solution instead.
* make shell script wrappers for the most common commands for user friendlyness
    - Issue passed on to **Tomi**
* write user account form, probably ask for copy of existing ones from the IT
  centre (with Sjur)
    - Discussed with Thor Øivind, this is up to us.
* write documentation for our `bound` users, with pointers to the ordinary
  documentation
    - Not done.
* refine smj proper noun lexica, cf. the propernoun-smj-lex.txt
    - Gone through the lexicon with Thomas, done minor adjustments.
* Get more `sma, smj` texts to improve language recognition
    - Have started working on sma, Børre works on smj.
* study corpus for language recognition errors, as well as paragraphs with mixed
  content
* generate parallel corpus files manually (with **Saara**)
    - Worked with this issue, provided nob texts.
* block out the CG rule(s) that remove(s) the Der readings using M4
    - Pseudocode written, issue passed on to M4 literates.
* meeting with **Thomas** Wednesday on `smj` proper nouns
    - Had short meeting, will return to the issue.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).

# 3. Documentation

TODO:
* finish i18n work (**Børre** and **Sjur**)
    - done when running in 'forrest run' mode - it works perfect now
    - does NOT work when running 'forrest site', instead it generates a heap of
   errors
    - i18n does not work in PDF ("Table of Content" won't translate)
* Write both user and admin documentation (**Børre**, review: **Sjur, Thomas**)
    - User documentation probably in several languages. This covers how to apply
   for an account, on what grounds one can apply, and pointers to documentation
   telling how to use the corpus.
    - Admin documentation, telling how we set the permissions to the corpus files,
   and whatever other processes and tasks needed to set up a corpus account.
* add the new *Words* section to the site (**Børre**)
    - not yet done

# 4. Corpus gathering

**Børre** got text from **Lene** and **Stig Gælok**, now we have 24 000 words in
smj/facta, up from 800! Have sent letters to Jovnna-Ánde Vest and Aage Solbakk.
Will contact more authors this week.

**TODO:**
* contact NSI (**Børre**)
* bug **Bård Eriksen** about the book list (**Børre**)
* continue to contact authors (**Børre**)

# 5. Corpus infrastructure

## General

Our way of dealing with the conversion of input documents has now reached an
advanced level. At some point we might consider to publish our results, to the
benefit of the rest of the research community.

**TODO:**
* remove headers and footers in the PDF conversion (**Saara**)
    - improving, but still needs some work
* consider an article on our corpus framework (**all**)

## User accounts and access

For details, see a [previous meeting memo](Meeting_2006-06-19), as well as the
memo from a [dedicated
meeting|/infra/corpus_policy.html].

### Shell access

TODO:
* export to `/opt` (with cron) tools that the project team members find in
  their cvs tree (the bound users do not have a cvs tree, and therefore need
  these tools in `/opt` in order to conduct linguistic analyses) (**Saara**)
    - Decision:
        - compiled transducers to `/opt` also in the future
        - scripts etc to `/usr/local/share/bin/`
* make shell script wrappers for the most common commands for user friendliness
  (we must think of what commands they are) (**Tomi**)?
    - (first version of first script, teaksta.sh, was checked in, but it is still
   not working (the problem is a simple handling of input-output, some shell
   script literates should have a look at it)
* write user account form, probably ask for copy of existing ones from the IT
  centre (**Trond** and **Sjur**)
* possibly deploy the user account form as an HTML form (**Børre**)
* write documentation for our `bound` users, with pointers to the ordinary
  documentation (**Børre, Trond**)
* write documentation for how to apply for a user account (where's the form, to
  whom do I send the form, who needs it, etc.) (**Børre**)
* make our own guidelines for the user application processing (**Børre**)
* make a test user (**Børre**)
* test corpus access as test user (**Trond**)

## More texts to the graphical corpus interface:

TODO:
* add text to the server (**Lars**)

## Aligner

Next week: discuss NT parallel corpus

Trond and Saara has tested manual alignment for testing.

TODO:
* use the present aligner to generate some initial input for Oslo to test.
  (**Trond** and **Saara**)
    - done
* gather parallel texts (**Trond**)

## Language recognition

TODO:
* Get more text of the poorly covered languages: `sma, smj` (**Trond, Børre**)
    - `sma:` get the Bible texts (**Trond**)
    - we now have more `smj` texts, should be used to improve the `smj` LM
   (**Saara**)
* study the mistakes our recogniser makes today (**Trond**, **Ilona**)
    - done
* what about paragraphs with mixed content? Build a corpus of such paragraphs
  (**Trond**)

# 6. Infrastructure

## Xerox tools wrapped as servers

Will continue this week, possible issues in the next meeting.

Feature request:
* option for XML output from server

**TODO:**
* improve and finish the present prototype (**Saara**)
    - done some, still more work to do

## Hyphenator

Problem: we overgenerate because we are using a circular transducer:

```
A-fi^ná^laid#ea^me
A-fi^ná^lai^dea^me
A-fi^ná^lai^dea^me
A-#fi^ná^laid#ea^me
A-#fi^ná^lai^dea^me
A-#fi^ná^lai^dea^me
A-fi^ná^laid#ea^me
A-fi^ná^lai^dea^me
A-fi^ná^lai^dea^me
```

Pseudocode for hyph cleanup:
```
- read cohort
- remove all but the readings with the least word boundaries
- compare the rest with the input string, disregarding ^ and #:
-- delete forms that do not correspond to the input string
- unique the final set
- print what is left (it should normally be only one form)
```

The input that correspond to the partially-cleaned data above:

```
A-finálaideame  A--fi^ná^laid-ea^mi
A-finálaideame  A--fi^ná^laid-ea^me
A-finálaideame  A--fi^ná^laid#ea^mi
A-finálaideame  A--fi^ná^laid#ea^me
A-finálaideame  A--fi^ná^lai^dea^mi
A-finálaideame  A--fi^ná^lai^dea^me
A-finálaideame  A--fi^ná^lai^dea^me
A-finálaideame  A-fi^ná^laid-ea^mi
A-finálaideame  A-fi^ná^laid-ea^me
A-finálaideame  A-fi^ná^laid#ea^mi
A-finálaideame  A-fi^ná^laid#ea^me
A-finálaideame  A-fi^ná^lai^dea^mi
A-finálaideame  A-fi^ná^lai^dea^me
A-finálaideame  A-fi^ná^lai^dea^me
A-finálaideame  A-#fi^ná^laid-ea^mi
A-finálaideame  A-#fi^ná^laid-ea^me
A-finálaideame  A-#fi^ná^laid#ea^mi
A-finálaideame  A-#fi^ná^laid#ea^me
A-finálaideame  A-#fi^ná^lai^dea^mi
A-finálaideame  A-#fi^ná^lai^dea^me
A-finálaideame  A-#fi^ná^lai^dea^me
A-finálaideame  A-fi^ná^laid-ea^mi
A-finálaideame  A-fi^ná^laid-ea^me
A-finálaideame  A-fi^ná^laid#ea^mi
A-finálaideame  A-fi^ná^laid#ea^me
A-finálaideame  A-fi^ná^lai^dea^mi
A-finálaideame  A-fi^ná^lai^dea^me
A-finálaideame  A-fi^ná^lai^dea^me
A-finálaideame  a--fi^ná^laid-ea^mi
A-finálaideame  a--fi^ná^laid-ea^me
A-finálaideame  a--fi^ná^laid#ea^mi
A-finálaideame  a--fi^ná^laid#ea^me
A-finálaideame  a--fi^ná^lai^dea^mi
A-finálaideame  a--fi^ná^lai^dea^me
A-finálaideame  a--fi^ná^lai^dea^me
A-finálaideame  a-fi^ná^laid-ea^mi
A-finálaideame  a-fi^ná^laid-ea^me
A-finálaideame  a-fi^ná^laid#ea^mi
A-finálaideame  a-fi^ná^laid#ea^me
A-finálaideame  a-fi^ná^lai^dea^mi
A-finálaideame  a-fi^ná^lai^dea^me
A-finálaideame  a-fi^ná^lai^dea^me
A-finálaideame  a-#fi^ná^laid-ea^mi
A-finálaideame  a-#fi^ná^laid-ea^me
A-finálaideame  a-#fi^ná^laid#ea^mi
A-finálaideame  a-#fi^ná^laid#ea^me
A-finálaideame  a-#fi^ná^lai^dea^mi
A-finálaideame  a-#fi^ná^lai^dea^me
A-finálaideame  a-#fi^ná^lai^dea^me
```

The fst used is:

```
sme/bin/hyph-sme.fst

To make:
make TARGET=sme hyph-sme.fst
```

TODO:
* finish the hyphenator clean-up script (**Sjur**)
    - done, but multi-word expressions are not handled correctly. Change separator
   from space to tab to fix it.
    - improve the clean-up script to remove more-complex word forms (**Saara**)
* Update the sma hyphenator rule set with the insights gained from smj updates
  (**Trond** during weekends)

## Automatic Bugzilla reminder for untouched bugs

Some perl-libraries needed by Bugzilla weren't in the path, causing it to not
work. Adding them should fix the issue.

TODO:
* give mail reminders a second try (**Børre**)
    - investigated, but libraries or path not updated.

## M4

**TODO:**
* make speller make targets that utilise M4 to produce normative
  and hyphenation transducers - postponed a while (**Tomi** or **Sjur**)
* disamb variants for derivations (see next) (**Saara**)

# 7. Linguistics

## Derivation and spellers like Aspell

* revert the CG rule that preferres lexicalised forms over derivations with M4
  (**Trond** wrote the M4 pseudocode, **M4-literates** to translate).
  In the beginning of sme-dis.rle there is an explanation of the pseudocode.
  Just search for the rules as explained there.
* find and study all derived verbs in our corpus (**Thomas**)
* suggest which derivations could be generated (**Thomas**)
* lexicalise the rest (**Thomas**)

## North Sámi

Nothing this week? No.

## Lule Sámi

TODO:
* refine smj proper noun lexica, cf. the propernoun-smj-lex.txt
  (**Thomas, Trond**)
    - started
* Schedule a T-T meeting this week - Wednesday.
    - done

# 8. Name lexicon infrastructure

Decided in Tromsø:
* add logging facilities to the interface
* add option to download local copies of the lexicon files directly from the db
* batch editing (change all entries in the found set), should later be enhanced
  to allow selection of exceptions (the found set minus deselected items)
* tag for excluding/including a name from certain applications
* future epxansion: choose what info to display in the single language browser
* display existing language entries when adding a new language to a record
* add editor to change single, existing entries

Details can be found in
[the meeting memo.](/admin/physical_meetings/tromso-2006-08-propnoun.html)

TODO:
* finish refactoring for multiple collections in the search interfarce
  (**Sjur**)
    - almost done - SD-terms now converted and working, still needs additions for a
   couple of other collections (our name lexicon, and the mechanical collection)
    - worked on a specification (in the new CVSROOT/words/ section)
        - finished
* develop the needed XQueries and UI (**Sjur, Tomi**)
* turn Tomcat on on the G5; send admin username and password to **Sjur**
  (**Børre**)
* add eXist and the proper noun interface to the G5 (**Sjur**)
* data synchronisation between risten.no and the cvs repo - postponed
* new version of xml2lexc (based on ccat), should handle complex names correct:
  construct entries like we have now from the different parts of a complex name
  entry - postponed

# 9. Tromsø meeting follow-up

TODO:
* speller development - see the [meeting
  memo|/admin/physical_meetings/tromso-2006-08-lexc2xspell.html]. Separate
  follow-up next week.
    - done
* Lule Sámi linguist (**Sjur**)
    - nothing done last week, but **Børre** has another possible candidate

## Speller data generation

**TODO:**
* start to plan the implementation of the speller data conversion/generation
  (**Tomi**)
    - started; plan documents should be added to `gt/doc/proof/`

# 10. Other

## Bug fixing

**64** open Divvun/Disamb bugs (two down!), and **25** risten.no bugs

Guess: 1/3 of the bugs are fixed already (?)

## Meetings and Marratech

**TODO:**
* download and install newest Marratech
  (**Maaren**)
* we need instructions on how to use it, and test it (**Sjur**)

## Task lists as iCal entries

TODO:
* update Maaren's and Saara's installations to r430284 (**Børre**)

# 11. Next meeting, closing

Next meeting 9.10.2006 at 9:30.

Closed at 10:38.

# Appendix - task lists for the next week

##  Børre

* corpus collection:
    - contact **Ája** (Kåfjord)
    - contact **Richard Valkepää** at NSI about older Min Áigi and Áššu files
    - remind **Bård Eriksen** about the book catalogue
* Move norwegian documents in Min Áigi from sme to nob
* corpus access:
    - possibly deploy the user account form as an HTML form
    - Write both user and admin documentation (**Børre**, review: **Sjur, Thomas**)
* set up Bugzilla automatic reminders for open issues
* finish Forrest i18n work (pdf)
* Get more `sma, smj` texts to improve language recognition
* set up Tomcat for use with eXist and the propnouns db on the G5
* add the new *Words* section to the site
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Maaren
* download and install latest Marratech

##  Saara

* add more texts to the graphical corpus interface
* remove headers and footers from pdf documents
* Implement server of the analysis tools.
* generate parallel corpus files manually (with **Trond**)
* Improve text_cat
* export corpus tools to location available to all (with cron), cf news disc.
* Write a script for cleaning sme-hyph-output.
* Implement M4-rules for sme-dis.rle
* improve `smj` LM based on the new, larger corpus
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur

* finish the hyphenator clean-up script
* name lexicon:
    - implement editing functions
    - finalise refactoring for multiple collections
    - implement improvements decided upon in Tromsø
    - XQuery refactoring and code development for our proper noun editor
* review user and admin documentation for corpus access
* write user account form, probably ask for copy of existing ones from the IT
  centre (with Trond)
* start hiring process of linguist and programmer
* finish i18n work of Forrest
* consider the problems of lexicalised derivations schewing analyses of
  derivation patterns
* install eXist and our local copy of risten.no and propnouns on the G5
* speller follow-up from the Tromsø meeting
* get instructions on how to use Marratech, and test it
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Thomas

* work with Polderland phonetic rules
* refine smj proper noun lexica, cf. the propernoun-smj-lex.txt
* find and study all derived verbs in our corpus (depends on **Trond**)
* suggest which derivations could be generated (depends on **Trond**)

##  Tomi

* start to plan the implementation of the speller data conversion/generation
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Trond

* make shell script wrappers for the most common commands for user friendlyness
* write user account form, probably ask for copy of existing ones from the IT
  centre (with Sjur)
* write documentation for our `bound` users, with pointers to the ordinary
  documentation
* refine smj proper noun lexica, cf. the propernoun-smj-lex.txt
* Get more `sma` texts to improve language recognition
* study paragraphs with mixed content
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
