# Meeting setup

* Date: 18.04.2006
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Room 4453, University of Tromsø
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, eye-to-eye contact, sound-to-ear

# Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from two weeks ago
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. name lexicon infrastructure
1. Spellers
1. Other issues
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 09:43.

Present: **Børre, Thomas, Tomi, Trond**

Absent: **Maaren** (sick leave), **Sjur** (paternal leave), **Saara** (not
available on iChat)

Main secretary: **Børre**

Agenda accepted with additions under "Other".

# 2. Reviewing the task list from the last meeting

##  Børre
* send out contracts with accompanying letter
    -  Not done
* Gather public texts, preferrably also parallel ones
    -  Not done
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
    -  Done
* convert nob and nno bible texts to be used as part of a parallel corpus
    -  Not done
* review the paratext2xml converter
    -  Didn't work one and a half week ago
* convert smj NT to paratext
    -  Not done
* Send out letters to the Iđut authors
    -  Not fonr
* Add corpus security re G5 syncing as an issue to Bugzilla
    -  Done
* write  docu for how to apply for a corpus user account (forms, recipients,
  etc)
    -  Not done
* remove old corpus files from gt/sme/corp/ after **Trond** has cleaned it
    -  Not done
* integrate generated corpus repository summaries in the Forrest site
    -  Not done
* install and test Gobby, install new version of SEE
    -  Not done
* make free texts available
    - add license info  DEADLINE: Tuesday 4.4.)
    - zip up the xml files in gtfree/ and put it up on the Divvun download area
   [http://www.divvun.no/downloads/](DEADLINE: Thursday 6.4.)
    - also provide an xml-free version?
    - possibly e-mail Finnut about the resource (if **Sjur** goes on paternal
   leave)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Maaren
* on sick leave throughout April

##  Saara
* Create a parallel corpora of the new testaments.
* add more texts to the graphical corpus interface
* grammatical searchability in the graphical corpus interface
* file a bug report of utf-8 check in xml-validation of the corpus files.
* make free texts available
    - rerun conversion (DEADLINE: Wednesday 5.4.)
        - done, started fixing errors.
    - zip up the xml files in gtfree/ and put it up on the Divvun download area
   [http://www.divvun.no/downloads/] (DEADLINE: Thursday 6.4.)
        - done
    - also provide an xml-free version?
    - set up a weekly cron script (but only if there are new files)
        - not done.
* Discuss: allow for more than one file at a time when uploading a file.
* Implement links to parallel files in corpus header.
* Turn on language recognition, skipping Finnish.
    - done
* add a possibility to upload whole documents for hyphenation (and also
  analysis, generation, etc)
* add a log of every word/text uploaded/hyphenated/analyzed etc.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* Follow up the lawyer treatment of the contracts
* Follow up on place names from Norge Digitalt
* Evaluate SFST as speller (and analyzer) lexicon
* write a background document on the corpus contracts
* public tender:
    - answer requests/questions
    - corpus repo access to free texts (with **Børre**)
        - **Saara** did it
* e-mail Finnut about the availability of the free corpus and the download link
    - done
* conversion of corpus repo summary xml to Forrest xml
    - done
* call EDD/**Christian Emil Ore** about national place name lexicon
* risten.no/proper noun lexicon development:
    - refactor code
        - done some
    - code design for XQueries needed for dict/term editing
        - not really done yet
    - other eXist/risten.no/proper noun related:
        - implemented a simple classification scheme editor as a test case for XQuery
    update extensions
        - added browsing of terms based on the classification scheme (to help develop
    the classification schemes)
* correct hyphenation of word boundaries and exceptions
    - the same as the next task
* Set up the mechanism for the hash-mark transducer package
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Thomas
* add incoming Lule Sámi word
**everything added that is possible now, about 50 unknown words left+2 abbr.
    +moaddi etc (numerals)
* work on North Sámi compounding and derivation
**not
* smj G3 issue
*not
* sme G3 issue
**not
* add all word boundaries and exception hyphenation marks
**Done: All sme except propernoun-file. Trond has gone through the propernoun
    file and added ^ marks for the most common name elements, such as fjell,
    fjord, but there is still more to be done.
* SubEthaEdit update
**done

##  Tomi
* move aspell UTF-8 suffix bug to Bugzilla
    - not done
* Document aspell infrastructure: finish doc/proof/spelling/X-spell/aspell.xml
  (it's almost done, but there are a couple of loose ends)
    - not done
* new proper name lexicon
    - implement data synchronisation of proper nouns between risten.no and CVS
        - not done
    - XQuery refactoring and code development for our proper noun editor
        - doing
    - new version of xml2lexc (based on ccat), should handle complex names correct:
   construct entries like we have now from the different parts of a complex name
   entry
        - not done
* read aligner docu, install, provide feedback
    - not done
* install and test Gobby, install new version of SEE
    - not done
* Set up the mechanism for the hash-mark transducer package
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - not

##  Trond
* Unify anchor lists, and conflate nno and nob into nor
    - Forgotten.
* remove deleted files from the CVS repository (in the Attic)
    - Not done.
* grammatical searchability in the graphical corpus interface: revise taglist
    - Done.
* better smj NT text, get fin and swe NT texts
    - Swe ok, fin promised but still not arrived. Nothing done to smj.
* Prepare a list of good candicates for first inclusion into the corpus.
    - Not done.
* start and lead discussion and work on semantic features for disamb
    - Not done.
* Install Gobby
    - Not done.
* get a key for **Maaren** in May
    - Not done.
* install aligner, test it and give feedback
    - Not done.
* correct hyphenation of word boundaries and exceptions
    - Not done.
* Set up the mechanism for the hash-mark transducer package
    - Discussed with Sjur and set up some
* get/upgrade keys for **Børre's** room for **Tomi** and **Thomas**
    - Also not done.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
    - Read through the list...

# 3. Documentation

TODO:
* documentation on how to apply for a user account for the corpus repo
  (**Børre**)
    -  Not done

# 4. Corpus gathering

## Collecting

See a [previous meeting memo](Meeting_2006-01-16) for what's to be done.

TODO: Send out the rest of the letters (**Børre**)

## Odin

**Sæth** replied by e-mail, hasn't had time to follow-up, but will try to
include us in their plans.

* **Børre** will weekly mirror the URL mentioned in Sæths e-mail,
  and add missing files to the corpus.
## Olavi Korhonen's Lule Sámi dictionary.

* No news this week

##  KIO Grafisk and the Iđut books

**TODO**:
* send letters to the authors (**Børre**)
* wait for the discussions with Davvi Girji
    -  A talk with Brita Kåven, revealed that they would have a look at
    the contracts **after** easter.

## Bible texts

We will get text from Finland, but still haven't received any. We have got the
Swedish text from Sweden. As for the last html versions from Norway, **Trond**
has not contacted them last week.

Swedish html has arrived, no paratext. Norsk bibelselskap has not sent
corrected New Testament versions for sme, and not paratext for nno/nob.

TODO:
* convert smj NT to paratext (**Børre**)
* get fin, swe, nob and nno NT and OT in **paratext** format. (**Trond**)

## Min Áigi

Everything ok here.

**TODO**:
* **Børre** to contact **Per Christian Biti** on technical issues.

## Kåfjord

Promised to send us texts, but nothing has arrived yet.

## Sámi Instituhtta

Audhild Schanche promised to sign the contract and send us texts they
have available.

# 5. Corpus infrastructure

TODO:
* remove deleted files from the CVS repository (**Trond**, still not done!!)
* add UTF-8 check as part of the validation (**Saara**, not finished yet)
    - Will file a bug report to Bz and continue the work.

## Changes and updates because of the Divvun public tender

User account admin and infra: see [previous
  memo|/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-03-06.html].

TODO: see above under *Documentation.*

Automatic build of the content of our corpus repo: also see [previous
  memo|/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-03-06.html].

TODO:
* convert from that xml to Forrest document format (**Sjur**)
    - nothing last week
* integrate the final Forrest documents into Forrest, and make sure it gets
  published (**Børre**)
    - waiting for the above
* make free texts available
    - zip up the xml files in gtfree/ and put it up on the Divvun download area
   [http://www.divvun.no/downloads/] (**Saara**, **Børre**,
   DEADLINE: Thursday 6.4.)
        - Done
    - also provide an xml-free version? I.e. only paragraphs, whatever, as given by
   ccat
    - done weekly by a cron script (but only if there are new files) (**Saara**)
    - e-mail Finnut about the availability of the free corpus, and the download
   link (**Sjur**, **Børre** if Sjur goes on paternal leave)
        - **Børre** to check if this is done.

## Free and non-free texts

More info in a [previous meeting
memo.|/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-03-13.html]

TODO:
* we need to rerun the conversion, and add/check copyright/license status
    - add license info (**Børre**, DEADLINE: Tuesday 4.4.)
        - Done
    - rerun conversion (**Saara**, DEADLINE: Wednesday 5.4.)
        - **Børre** to check if this is done.

## Linking parallel files

DECISION:
We'll keep the original filename, and store linking info in the header (has to
be added manually).

TODO:
* develop the web interface for uploading to make it easier to add several
  documents in one go (as a serial process) (**Saara**)

## More texts to the graphical corpus interface:

TODO:
* We would like to have more than the NT in the graphical interface http://omilia.uio.no/CE/sami/ (**Saara**)
* We would like to have grammatical searchability, not only POS. (**Saara**,
  **Trond**
    -  The tag list is revised, and Lars has implemented a graphical demo version of it. He will install the revised list to the demo corpus.
* This presupposes a discussion with Oslo. (**Trond** to start discussion
  and **Trond** and **Saara** to continue
    - The discussion is ongoing, now we will only have to choose and install texts.
* For Lule Sámi: We would like to have a parallel corpus interface with NT
  (text only). This presupposes better quality texts (**Trond, Børre**)
    - Better Lule NT text still not made.
* preparations: gather more texts (we are doing this)
* Review the tag list and have it ready for inclusion (gt/cwb/korpustags.txt)
  (**Trond, Linda**)
    - Done.
* Prepare a list of good candicates for first inclusion into the corpus.
  (**Trond, Linda**)
    - Not done.

Top-two priorities:
1.  Linda and Trond to find text to add.
1.  Lars to add them.

## Language recognition

TODO:
* turn on language recognition, skipping Finnish (**Saara**)
    - Done, it seems.

Now, there are gross errors in the material, the texts must be reconverted, it seems.

# 6. Infrastructure

## Aligner

Today, we have two anchor files in addition to the original one.

TODO:
* Read documentation and try out, give feedback to Bergen. (**Trond**,
  **Saara**, **Tomi**)
* conflate nno with nob into 'nor' (**Trond**)
    -  Partly done, must go through and see.
* **Saara** to install the aligner, everyone to read the documentation
* Move smj to the anchor.txt file, so that we get eng/nor/sme/smj/fin.
    -  **Thomas** has finished smj, **Trond** to add the smj column to the rest.

Not much has happened, we must work more on this issue.

## Hyphenator

TODO:
* correct hyphenation of word boundaries and exceptions (**Sjur, Trond**)
* add a possibility to upload whole documents for hyphenation (and also
  analysis, generation, etc) (**Saara**)
* we should log all and every word/text uploaded/hyphenated/analyzed etc
    - we'll do it, but it does not have first priority (**Saara**)

Trond and Sjur have had a look at the issue. We postpone it until Sjur is back.

# 7. Linguistics

## General - hyphenation

See discussion, open questions and decission in the [previous meeting
memo.|/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-04-03.html]

TODO:
* add all word boundaries (**Thomas**)
    -  Done: All sme except propernoun-file. Trond has gone through the propernoun
    file and added ^ marks for the most common name elements, such as fjell,
    fjord, but there is still more to be done.
* Set up the mechanism for the hash transducer package. (**Sjur, Tomi, Trond**)
    - Not done, let us wait until Sjur is back.

TODO:

Fix the rest of the propernoun file (**Trond**, **Thomas**)

## North Sámi

### Semantic feature system

Further discussion and details in
[this](/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-03-20.html) and
[this](/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-03-27.html)
meeting memo.

## Lule Sámi

TODO:
* add the rest of the inc- words (**Thomas**)
    -  everything added that is possible now, about 50 unknown words left+2 abbr.
    +moaddi etc (numerals)
* translate Northern Sámi lists and sets to Lule Sámi
    -  Hmm, this is done, isn't it? We have a working smj-dis.rle file.

# 8. Name lexicon infrastructure

TODO:
1. refactor and prepare risten.no for multiple collections:
    1.  refactor the code into more and more specific components according to our
    folder hierarchy (**Tomi, Sjur**)
        1. things are moving forward
1. develop the needed XQueries and interface (**Sjur, Tomi**)
    1.  developing
1. data synchronisation between risten.no and the cvs repo (**Tomi**)
    1.  nothing this week
1. test and review when ready

# 9. Spellers

Nothing until the new proper noun lexicon is in place. We don't have enough
people to do both.

# 10. Other

## Bug fixing

**47** open Divvun/Disamb bugs, and **25** risten.no bugs

After the corpus issues have been somewhat settled, we should do a bug barnraising. ... and then a new one after the name lexicon is fixed.

# 11. Summary, task list

##  Børre
* send out contracts with accompanying letter
* Gather public texts, preferrably also parallel ones
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
* convert nob and nno bible texts to be used as part of a parallel corpus
* review the paratext2xml converter
* convert smj NT to paratext
* Send out letters to the Iđut authors
* write  docu for how to apply for a corpus user account (forms, recipients,
  etc)
* remove old corpus files from gt/sme/corp/ after **Trond** has cleaned it
* integrate generated corpus repository summaries in the Forrest site
* make free texts available
    - possibly e-mail Finnut about the resource (if **Sjur** goes on paternal
   leave)
        - check if this has been done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Maaren
* on sick leave throughout April

##  Saara
* Create a parallel corpora of the new testaments.
* add more texts to the graphical corpus interface
* grammatical searchability in the graphical corpus interface
* file a bug report of utf-8 check in xml-validation of the corpus files.
* make free texts available
    - rerun conversion (DEADLINE: Wednesday 5.4.)
    - zip up the xml files in gtfree/ and put it up on the Divvun download area
   [http://www.divvun.no/downloads/] (DEADLINE: Thursday 6.4.)
    - also provide an xml-free version?
    - set up a weekly cron script (but only if there are new files)
* Discuss: allow for more than one file at a time when uploading a file.
* Implement links to parallel files in corpus header.
* Turn on language recognition, skipping Finnish
* add a possibility to upload whole documents for hyphenation (and also
  analysis, generation, etc)
* add a log of every word/text uploaded/hyphenated/analyzed etc.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* on paternal leave

##  Thomas
* add all word boundaries
* work on compounding and derivation
* smj G3 issue
* sme G3 issue

##  Tomi
* move aspell UTF-8 suffix bug to Bugzilla
* Document aspell infrastructure: finish doc/proof/spelling/X-spell/aspell.xml
  (it's almost done, but there are a couple of loose ends)
* new proper name lexicon
    - implement data synchronisation of proper nouns between risten.no and CVS
    - XQuery refactoring and code development for our proper noun editor
    - new version of xml2lexc (based on ccat), should handle complex names correct:
   construct entries like we have now from the different parts of a complex name
   entry
* read aligner docu, install, provide feedback
* install and test Gobby, install new version of SEE
* Set up the mechanism for the hash-mark transducer package
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Trond
* Unify anchor lists, and conflate nno and nob into nor
* remove deleted files from the CVS repository (in the Attic)
* better smj NT text, get fin NT texts
* Prepare a list of good candicates for first inclusion into the corpus.
* start and lead discussion and work on semantic features for disamb
* Install Gobby
* get a key for **Maaren** in May
* install aligner, test it and give feedback
* correct hyphenation of word boundaries and exceptions
* get/upgrade keys for **Børre's** room for **Tomi** and **Thomas**
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).

# 12. Next meeting, closing

24.04.2006 09:30

**Sjur** is on paternal leave.

Closed at 11:47
