# Meeting setup

* Date: 06.02.2006
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are :-)
* Tools: iChat, SubEthaEdit

#  Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from two weeks ago
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. name lexicon infrastructure
1. Other issues
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 09:38.

Present: **Børre, Saara, Sjur, Tomi, Trond**

Absent: **Maaren, Thomas**

Main secretary: **Trond**

Agenda accepted as is, we'll try to finish by 10.55, to allow  for joining
the celebration of the Sámi national day.

# 2. Reviewing the task list from the last meeting

##  Børre
* send out contracts with accompanying letter
    -  Sent to Iđut and Kåfjord municipality
* Gather public texts, preferrably also parallel ones
    -  Not done
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
    -  Not done
* review code and documentation for corpus xsl files under version control
    -  Not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    -  Not done
* Other
    -  The server didn't get an IP-address using DHCP. It turned out that if the
    «Gateway Assistant» was used, then the network card connected to «the
    outside world» didn't get an IP-address using DHCP. Even if all the services
    that was started using the «Gateway Assistant» were turned off, this
    behaviour went on. The «solution» was to reinstall Mac OS X Server, and not
    use the «GA».

##  Maaren
* work with risten.no
* discuss with relevant people regarding seminar on proofing tools, normativity
  and SGL in February/March, including place.

##  Saara
* continue discussion on the new lexicon format
* Refine language detection for Finnish
* Finnish the review of the hyphenation detection.
* Review the handling of xsl-files in corpus infrastructure, including version
  control
    - almost done, I'll need some help with the xsl-processing of the
   main text.
* Fix the preprocess script and optimize it by building an analyzator
  for the multi-part expressions.
    - it seems that building a preprocessor-specific analyzator is not possible.
* finalize an improved working version of the CGI and command line scripts for
  corpus additions
    - almost done.
* update conversion from lexc to xml (proper names) with the latest
  refinements
* Try to add numeral treatment as part of the analyzator.
    - not done
* Change character coding detection to paragraph-based.
    - done, use convert2xml.pl with option --multi-coding. This
   introduces some errors (due to the small size of some paragraphs), so
   the default is still one coding per file.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* Follow up the lawyer treatment of the contracts
    - not done
* Lule Sámi twol problems, with **Thomas** and **Trond**
    - not done
* follow up on voice group-chat not working to Sámediggi
    - Test Marratech when the new Marratech server is in place
        - not done
* project planning with **Trond**, continued
    - also look at the development processes - specification and  testing
        - not done
* Follow up on place names from Norge Digitalt
    - write an e-mail to or call **Bjørn Olav Megard**
        - not done
* Evaluate SFST as speller (and analyzer) lexicon
    - more thorough analysis than was possible in Guovdageaidnu
        - not done
* write a background document on the corpus contracts
    - not done
* continue proper name lexicon work and discussion
    - did a lot to upgrade the risten.no infrastructure to be multi-collection
   aware
    - discussions in the newsgroup
    - added the test lexicons **Saara** created to my own instance of risten.no
* public tender:
    - waited for and received a draft public tender document from **Finnut**
* smj G3 issue with **Thomas** and **Trond**
    - not done
* sme G3 issue with **Thomas** and **Trond**
    - not done
* call EDD/**Christian Emil Ore** about national place name lexicon
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - closed [bug #217](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=217)

##  Thomas
On sick leave.

##  Tomi
* Aspell: Continue working on the affix file & aspell
    - Contact aspell author (UTF-8 thing)
        - Not done
* corpus infrastructure:
    - dtd location (both public and internal)
        - Not done
    - cgi-admin script for adding xsl-files
        - Not done
* Document aspell and corpus infrastructure
* ccat: add a -v option - it should return the version of the tool
    - Done
* new proper name lexicon
    - remove last part of complex names not used as simplex names
        - Not done
    - start looking at conversion of the name lexicon from present format to xml
    - discuss the new lexicon format in the newsgroup
    - Look into synchronisation of proper names with risten.no
        - Some progress
    - new version of xml2lexc (based on catxml, now ccat)
        - Not done
        - xml2lexc update to handle complex names: construct entries like we have now
    from the different parts of a complex name entry
* comment review template made by **Saara**
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Trond
* Work on corpus texts with Børre.
    - Done some progres wrt. processing of texts.
* 3-part compounds with  **Sjur** and **Thomas**.
    - Had a look at the rule set myself, but awaiting Thomas.
* smj G3 issue with **Sjur** and **Thomas**.
    - Not done.
* sme G3 issue with **Sjur** and **Thomas**.
    - Not done.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - Not done.
* Worked mostly on disambiguation.

# 3. Documentation

## Reviews

Anything? Nothing.

## Other docu

Anything? Documentation has been added for disambiguation.

# 4. Corpus gathering

## Collecting

See a [previous meeting memo](Meeting_2006-01-16) for what's to be done.

Sent letter to Iđut and Kåfjord.

TODO: Still a *lot* for **Børre!**

## Odin

Waiting for **Sæth** to discuss with colleagues about how to implement the
cooperation, and return to us.

Nothing heard.

## Bible texts

TODO:
* write a paratext2xml converter
    - **Tomi** has already done it! Excellent!
    - files requiring this converter should have the filename extension **.ptx**
        - Cf. the following nob Old Testament texts: 01GENNBST.u8.PTX
   19PSANBST.u8.PTX
    - **Børre** will review the converter as part of adding the Norwegian texts
   to our corpus
* convert smj NT to paratext. (**Børre**)
* ask to get fin and swe NT and OT in paratext format. (**Trond**)

# 5. Corpus infrastructure

Task list:
1. Include the xsl files under version control
    1. RCS version control is almost finished, but an issue with access control is
   still open. Discussed a bit in the meeting, but nothing conclusive. We'll
   continue the discussion in the newsgroup.
1. Incorporate language detection as part of the corpus processing (**Saara**)
    1. Almost finished. Needs improved Finnish language model - presently it isn't
   able to distinguish Finnish from Sámi (proving the family bonds:-)
1. we need to review whether only automatic hyphen detection is good enough, or
  whether manual post-processing in some form is needed. Delayed until we have
  some results to base the review on.
    1. Acceptable results: 90% of all real hyphens correctly tagged.
1. CGI-admin script to add xsl-file to a corpus file that doesn't have one 
  (**Saara**)

Things are moving forward, but still more work to do. The list is left as is.

E-mail address in case of upload errors:

corpus@giellatekno.uit.no (-> Børre?) Also for reports about new uploads.

/www/opt/www/cgi-bin/smi/upload.cgi (no Forrest)
http://localhost:8888/upload/upload_corpus_file.html (Forrest)

One option is to ask the cochise team, that would be royd or steinar and the
address cc.uit.no.

*Problems with greek letter in Word documents. With font Sam Times Uni(versal)
    -  (**Børre**) Can't we just manually change
    the letters and fonts in the few documents affected?

We forget about these texts for the time being, they'll be put in a dir. for
broken texts. Such texts can be looked upon later , if wanted/needed.

## Suggestion for Script for text analysis. 

We would like a shadow catalogue ga/ (giella analysed) parallel to the gt/ catalogue, 
with one file for each of the five directories. A way of getting this is to ach night
(afternoon!): Make a crontab job, run the following command, for each
directory admin, bible, facta, ficti, laws, news: 

```
ccat -a -r /usr/local/share/corp/gt/sme | preprocess --abbr=bin/abbr.txt
|  lookup -flags mbTT -utf8 bin/sme.fst | lookup2cg 
|  vislcg --grammar src/sme-dis.rle > /usr/local/share/corp/ga/sme/dir.txt 

For example:

ccat -a -r /usr/local/share/corp/gt/sme | preprocess --abbr=bin/abbr.txt
|  lookup -flags mbTT -utf8 bin/sme.fst | lookup2cg | vislcg --grammar src/sme-dis.rle
  > /usr/local/share/corp/ga/sme/admin.txt 
```

* Today:    /usr/local/share/corp/gt/sme/DIR(/*)/*xml
* Addition: /usr/local/share/corp/ga/sme/dir.txt

TODO:
* Look at the suggestion from **Trond** (**Saara**, discuss with **Trond**
  if unclear)
* ask for e-mail adress as specified above (**Trond**)

# 6. Linguistics

Anything? Nothing.

# 7. Name lexicon infrastructure

## Complex names

TODO:
* make sure xml2lexc can handle complex names in ways compatible with our
  present tool chain (=reconstruct the lexc format we have now) (**Tomi**)
    - the resulting file format should be identical to our present prop-name
   file (=lexc), that can then be converted to our new xml format using the same
   script as for the regular names (**Tomi** or **Saara**, but only when the
   technical details are settled)
* **Saara** has added the analyzer as part
  of the preprocess, but it is slow, and needs to be optimized.

## XML format

TODO:
1. update conversion from lexc to xml to reflect new xml format (**Saara**)
    1. mostly done, some open questions left
1. testing of conversion
1. eXist as editor:
    1. develop the needed XQueries and interface
    1. data synchronisation between risten.no and 
    1. test whether eXist as editor is actually working well

More TODO:
* read and comment in the news group (**all**)
* decide upon and set up infra for new projects and project ideas

Definitions/terminology:
* **synchronisation** in our context is *data* synchronisation, that is, to
  bring the two repositories (CVS and risten.no) in synch regarding the shared
  lexicons (propnouns at least).
* **code refactoring** is the process of reorganising the code by moving general
  functions and snippets out of specific functions and into general libraries
  for shared access, easier maintenance, and a better organisation.

# 8. Other

## SGL Seminar

* SGL/normativity seminar
    -  all members = potentially/likely all languages
        - not all languages, only North Sámi
    -  date? As early as possible, end of February/beginning of March
    -  place? **Maaren** will investigate

## Technical issues

* The mac os / perl bug (at least **Trond** and **Sjur** has it, [Bugzilla
  #211|http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=211]):
    - utf8 "\xC4" does not map to Unicode at /Users/trond/gt/script/preprocess line
   82. This msg did not show up in 10.3 (perl 5.8.1), but does so in 10.4 (perl
   5.8.6). It is probably a perl - OS mismatch. (**Trond**, **Saara**,
   **Tomi**)
        - 10.4 introduced support for locales in the shell (10.3 and earlier didn't
    know about locales)
    - Test: the result of the last line should indicate whether this is a problem
   in cat or a Perl/OS mismatch.
    - Is this a problem with ccat?
        - It doesn't seem so (3 min and still counting)
        - In the end, the bug turned up with ccat as well. I gave the command:
        - zcorp/gt/sme/*/*xml | preprocess --abbr=bin/abbr.txt | lookup -flags
    mbTT -utf8 bin/sme.fst | lookup2cg | vislcg --grammar=src/sme-dis.rle
    --minimal | sort | less
        - and it (in the end) responded: 
```
1729 constraint rules
utf8 "\xA1" does not map to Unicode at /home/trond/gt/script/preprocess line 109, <> chunk 12.
```

To ccat's defence I must say that cat, in a similar situation, would have given far
more error messages (hold on, testing still under way).

```
   preprocess file_name.txt - OK
   cat file_name.txt | preprocess - bug!!
   catxml file_name.xml | preprocess - ??
   ccat filename | preprocess - bug !!
```

This bug isn't a high priority any more, because ccat behaves differently than
cat, and because there is the possibility of avoiding cat when working locally.

BUG: close as Won't fix. (**Børre**)

## Bug fixing

**32** open bugs (and 24 risten.no bugs)

* Add bug report for the Xerox backspace error (**Trond**)

# 9. Summary, task list

##  Børre
* send out contracts with accompanying letter
* Gather public texts, preferrably also parallel ones
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
* review code and documentation for corpus xsl files under version control
* convert nob and nno bible texts to be used as part of a parallel corpus, and
  review the paratext2xml converter as part of the conversion
* convert smj NT to paratext
* close bug 211 as WONTFIX
    -  DONE :-)

* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Maaren
* work with risten.no
* discuss with relevant people regarding seminar on proofing tools, normativity
  and SGL in February/March, including place.

##  Saara
* continue discussion on the new lexicon format
* Refine language detection for Finnish
* Finnish the review of the hyphenation detection.
* Review the handling of xsl-files in corpus infrastructure, including version
  control
* Fix the preprocess script and optimize it by building an analyzator
  for the multi-part expressions. 
* finalize an improved working version of the CGI and command line scripts for
  corpus additions
* update conversion from lexc to xml (proper names) with the latest refinements
* Try to add numeral treatment as part of the analyzator.
* Look at crontab ga/ directory issue with **Trond.**
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* Follow up the lawyer treatment of the contracts
* Lule Sámi twol problems, with **Thomas** and **Trond**
* project planning with **Trond**, continued
* Follow up on place names from Norge Digitalt
* Evaluate SFST as speller (and analyzer) lexicon
* write a background document on the corpus contracts
* public tender:
    - review draft tender document from Finnut
* smj G3 issue with **Thomas** and **Trond**
* sme G3 issue with **Thomas** and **Trond**
* call EDD/**Christian Emil Ore** about national place name lexicon
* risten.no/proper noun lexicon development: fix bugs, continue development
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Thomas
* work on North Sámi compounding and derivation
* review corpus usage documentation
* smj G3 issue with **Sjur** and **Trond**
* sme G3 issue with **Sjur** and **Trond**

##  Tomi
* Aspell: Continue working on the affix file & aspell
    - Contact aspell author (UTF-8 thing)
* corpus infrastructure:
    - dtd location (both public and internal)
* Document aspell and corpus infrastructure
* new proper name lexicon
    - remove last part of complex names not used as simplex names
    - discuss the new lexicon format and other issues in the newsgroup
    - Look into data synchronisation of proper nouns between risten.no and CVS
    - new version of xml2lexc (based on ccat), should handle complex names correct:
   construct entries like we have now from the different parts of a complex name
   entry
* comment review template made by **Saara**
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Trond
* Work on corpus texts with Børre.
* Contact the Finnish and Swedish Bible societies to get Bible texts.
* Look at ga/ directory issue with **Saara.**
* News group discussion followup.
* Do a bug report (if not done) on commandline bahaviour in the Xerox tools.
* Ask for e-mail adress for corpus upload script
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).

# 10. Next meeting, closing

13.02.2006 09:30

Closed at 10:37
