# Meeting setup

* Date: 13.02.2006
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are :-)
* Tools: iChat, SubEthaEdit

#  Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from two weeks ago
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. name lexicon infrastructure
1. Other issues
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 09:57.

Present: **Børre, Saara, Sjur, Trond**

Absent: **Maaren, Thomas, Tomi**

Main secretary: **Børre**

Agenda accepted as is.

# 2. Reviewing the task list from the last meeting

##  Børre
* send out contracts with accompanying letter
    -  Min Áigi
* Gather public texts, preferrably also parallel ones
    -  Gathered some, sitting on a computer at the Sámediggi.
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
    -  Converted existing texts using the upload form. Nice experience:-)
* review code and documentation for corpus xsl files under version control
    -  Not done
* convert nob and nno bible texts to be used as part of a parallel corpus, and
  review the paratext2xml converter as part of the conversion
    -  Not done
* convert smj NT to paratext
    -  Not done
* close bug 211 as WONTFIX
    -  DONE :-)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Maaren
* work with risten.no
* discuss with relevant people regarding seminar on proofing tools, normativity
  and SGL in February/March, including place.

##  Saara
* continue discussion on the new lexicon format
* Refine language detection for Finnish
    - not done
* Finish the review of the hyphenation detection.
    - not done
* Review the handling of xsl-files in corpus infrastructure, including version
  control
    - done
* Fix the preprocess script and optimize it.
    - not done
* finalize an improved working version of the CGI and command line scripts for
  corpus additions
    - done
* update conversion from lexc to xml (proper names) with the latest refinements
* Try to add numeral treatment as part of the analyzator.
    - not done
* Look at crontab ga/ directory issue with **Trond.**
    - done, but there is a bug.. which should be fixed now.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* Follow up the lawyer treatment of the contracts
    - not done
* Lule Sámi twol problems, with **Thomas** and **Trond**
    - delayed till **Thomas** is back
* project planning with **Trond**, continued
    - not done
* Follow up on place names from Norge Digitalt
    - not done
* Evaluate SFST as speller (and analyzer) lexicon
    - not done
* write a background document on the corpus contracts
    - not done
* public tender:
    - review draft tender document from Finnut
        - done, feedback and changes returned
* smj G3 issue with **Thomas** and **Trond**
    - delayed till **Thomas** is back
* sme G3 issue with **Thomas** and **Trond**
    - delayed till **Thomas** is back
* call EDD/**Christian Emil Ore** about national place name lexicon
    - not done
* risten.no/proper noun lexicon development: fix bugs, continue development
    - wrote a draft specification of filename conventions, that at the same time
   also repeates what has been said earlier regarding dir. structure.
    - some coding as well (don't remember the details any more)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - closed [217](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=217)
* other:
    - monthly report for January
    - report for 2005 to Nordplus Sprog

##  Thomas

On sick-leave.

##  Tomi
* Aspell: Continue working on the affix file & aspell
    - Contact aspell author (UTF-8 thing)
* corpus infrastructure:
    - dtd location (both public and internal)
* Document aspell and corpus infrastructure
* new proper name lexicon
    - remove last part of complex names not used as simplex names
    - discuss the new lexicon format and other issues in the newsgroup
    - Look into data synchronisation of proper nouns between risten.no and CVS
    - new version of xml2lexc (based on ccat), should handle complex names correct:
   construct entries like we have now from the different parts of a complex name
   entry
* comment review template made by **Saara**
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Trond
* Work on corpus texts with Børre.
    - Done, but more to do.
* Contact the Finnish and Swedish Bible societies to get Bible texts.
    - Not done.
* Look at ga/ directory issue with **Saara.**
    - Done. She has made a script, and I have posted things to the newsgroup.
* News group discussion followup.
    - Some done.
* Do a bug report (if not done) on commandline bahaviour in the Xerox tools.
    - Hmm, not done, after all.
* Ask for e-mail adress for corpus upload script
    - Don't remember this one.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
    - This one was forgotten.

# 3. Documentation

## Reviews

XSLT processing part of the corpus infra review is finished. The code is
finished and ready to use, but language identification still needs improvements.

# 4. Corpus gathering

## Collecting

See a [previous meeting memo](Meeting_2006-01-16) for what's to be done.

TODO: Send out the rest of the letters (**Børre**)

Since last meeting:

* Min Áigi
* called Anders Kintel - will sign it as soon as he gets the contract; will also
  burn on a CD
* Swedish Sámi Parliament: Grundström will be finished by summer time, now
  proofreading

Next:
* calling Olavi Korhonen, his dictionary is now in for printing
* then continuing on the list of orgs/persons to contact

## Odin

Waiting for **Sæth** to discuss with colleagues about how to implement the
cooperation, and return to us.

TODO:
* call Sæth (**Børre**)

## Bible texts

TODO:
* review paratext2xml converter (**Børre**)
* convert smj NT to paratext. (**Børre**)
* ask to get fin and swe NT and OT in paratext format. (**Trond**)

# 5. Corpus infrastructure

We need more "version control" in the corpus work - we don't know which version
of the XSL script was used (but roughly whether it was used or not). We need to
document within the XSL file which version of *all* tools were used, including
the XSL file (common section/template) itself.

Transferring the old gt/sme/corp files to the new corpus repo:
* for the biggest top ten (or so) the orig. should be located and copied to the
  new corpus repo
* then these files should be removed from gt/sme/corp/
* all small files could just be forgotten/ignored

Task list:
1. Include the xsl files under version control
    1. RCS version control is almost finished, but an issue with access control is
   still open.
        1. Access control resolved through Unix groups: one group for corpus
    maintainers with write access, and another for corpus users, with read-only
    access.
1. Improve Finnish language detection as part of the corpus processing
    1. Move to Bugzilla (**Saara**)
1. Review automatic hyphen:
    1. Acceptable results: 90% of all real hyphens correctly tagged.
        1. Move to Bugzilla (**Saara**)

Further discussion about corpus analysis and computer use:

* the new G5 is tremendeously faster than cochise, thus we want to use it
* cochise will continue to be our main corpus repo
* the corpus/gt/ dir will be synchronised with the G5
* corpus analysis and usage will happen on the G5
* we need to develop strong enough security routines for the G5 to fulfill our
  obligations towards the text licensers
* we are still using only one processor when analysing - making some simple
  multiprocessor analysis script will increase the speed of the analysis a lot

# 6. Linguistics

Anything? Nothing.

# 7. Name lexicon infrastructure

## Complex names

TODO:
* make sure xml2lexc can handle complex names in ways compatible with our
  present tool chain (=reconstruct the lexc format we have now) (**Tomi**)
    - the resulting file format should be identical to our present prop-name
   file (=lexc), that can then be converted to our new xml format using the same
   script as for the regular names (**Tomi** or **Saara**, but only when the
   technical details are settled)
* **Saara** has added the analyzer as part
  of the preprocess, but it is slow, and needs to be optimized.

Move these issues to bugzilla (**Børre**)

###  Preprocessor optimization

To optimize one could build a targeted transducer only containing the relevant
lexicons for preprocessing. But presently that leads to the following lexicons
being reported as referenced but undefined:

* (Punctuation)
* (Abbreviation)
* (Acronym)
* (Adposition)
* (Negativeverb)
* (Copula)
* (VerbRoot)
* (AdjectiveRoot)
* (At)
* (NounSecond)
* (ALIT)
* (NAMAT)
* (SAS)

Perhaps picking the

```
hum-tf4-ans142:~/gt/sme/src trond$ grep '% ' adv-sme-lex.txt 
earret% eará adv ;
dan% dihte adv ;
...
```

TODO:
1. make a  lexc Root lexicon (first 40 lines of sme-lex.txt)
1. extract the relevant parts of the relevant lexica from the main transducer
1. built from the union of a and b.

Discussion will continue on the newsgroup.

## XML format

TODO:
1. testing of conversion
1. eXist as editor:
    1. develop the needed XQueries and interface
    1. data synchronisation between risten.no and 
    1. test whether eXist as editor is actually working well

# 8. Other

## SGL Seminar

SGL has now been elected, with the folowing members:

* Rolf Olsen (Else Turi)
* Tor Magne Berg (Marit Breie Henriksen)
* Elle Marja Vars (-)
* Lena Kappfjell (Albert Jåma)
* Heidi Andersen (-)

SGL/normativity seminar:
*  all members = potentially/likely all languages
    - not all languages, only North Sámi
*  date? As early as possible, end of February/beginning of March
*  place? **Maaren** will investigate

##  Infra for new projects and ideas:
* make Forrest integration work as expected (**Børre**)

## Bug fixing

**30** open bugs (and 24 risten.no bugs)

* Add bug report for the Xerox backspace error (**Trond**)

# 9. Summary, task list

##  Børre
* send out contracts with accompanying letter
* Gather public texts, preferrably also parallel ones
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
* convert nob and nno bible texts to be used as part of a parallel corpus
* review the paratext2xml converter
* convert smj NT to paratext
* Call Ove Sæth and Olavi Korhonen
* Correct Forrest integration for new projects and project ideas
* Move complex name lexicon issue to bugzilla
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Maaren
* work with risten.no
* discuss with relevant people regarding seminar on proofing tools, normativity
  and SGL in February/March, including place.

##  Saara
* continue discussion on the new lexicon format
* Move the issue "Refine language detection for Finnish" to Bugzilla
* Move the issue "Finnish the review of the hyphenation detection" to Bugzilla
* Add version information of the tools to part of the corpus infra.
* Fix the preprocess script and optimize it.
* finalize an improved working version of the CGI and command line scripts for
  corpus additions
* update conversion from lexc to xml (proper names) with the latest refinements
* Try to add numeral treatment as part of the analyzator.
* Look at crontab ga/ directory issue with **Trond.**
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* Follow up the lawyer treatment of the contracts
* Lule Sámi twol problems, with **Thomas** and **Trond**
* project planning with **Trond**, continued
* Follow up on place names from Norge Digitalt
* Evaluate SFST as speller (and analyzer) lexicon
* write a background document on the corpus contracts
* public tender:
    - review draft tender document from Finnut
* smj G3 issue with **Thomas** and **Trond**
* sme G3 issue with **Thomas** and **Trond**
* call EDD/**Christian Emil Ore** about national place name lexicon
* risten.no/proper noun lexicon development: fix bugs, continue development
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Thomas
* work on North Sámi compounding and derivation
* review corpus usage documentation
* smj G3 issue with **Sjur** and **Trond**
* sme G3 issue with **Sjur** and **Trond**

##  Tomi
* move aspell UTF-8 suffix bug to Bugzilla
* corpus infrastructure:
    - dtd location (both public and internal)
* Document aspell infrastructure: finish doc/proof/spelling/X-spell/aspell.xml
  (it's almost done, but there are a couple of loose ends)
* new proper name lexicon
    - discuss the new lexicon format and other issues in the newsgroup
    - Look into data synchronisation of proper nouns between risten.no and CVS
    - new version of xml2lexc (based on ccat), should handle complex names correct:
   construct entries like we have now from the different parts of a complex name
   entry
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Trond
* Work on corpus texts with Børre.
* Contact the Finnish and Swedish Bible societies to get Bible texts.
* Look at ga/ directory issue with **Saara.**
* News group discussion followup.
* Do a bug report (if not done) on commandline (mis)behaviour in the Xerox tools
* Ask IT guys for an e-mail adress for corpus upload script:
  corpus@giellatekno.uit.no (forwarded to Børre)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).

# 10. Next meeting, closing

20.02.2006 09:30

Closed at 11:33
