# Meeting setup

* Date: 03.04.2006
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Wherever we are :-)
* Tools: iChat, SubEthaEdit

# Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from two weeks ago
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. name lexicon infrastructure
1. Spellers
1. Other issues
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 09:43.

Present: **Børre, Saara, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi, Trond**

Absent: **Maaren** (sick leave)

Main secretary: **Børre**

Agenda accepted with additions under "Other".

# 2. Reviewing the task list from the last meeting

##  Børre
* send out contracts with accompanying letter
    -  Not done
* Gather public texts, preferrably also parallel ones
    -  Not done
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
    -  Some done
* convert nob and nno bible texts to be used as part of a parallel corpus
    -  Not done
* review the paratext2xml converter
    -  Not done
* convert smj NT to paratext
    -  Not done
* Move complex name lexicon issue to bugzilla
    -  Done
* Send out letters to the Iđut authors
    -  Waiting for address list from Åge Persen
* Add corpus security re G5 syncing as an issue to Bugzilla
    -  Not done
* write docu for how to apply for a corpus user account (forms, recipients,
  etc)
    -  Not done
* remove old corpus files from gt/sme/corp/ after **Trond** has cleaned it
    -  Not done
* integrate generated corpus repository summaries in the Forrest site
    -  Not done
* Ask for email-address: corpus@giellatekno.uit.no
    -  Done. It works.
* install and test Gobby, install new version of SEE (also for Thomas)
    -  Haven't installed SEE. Tried to compile Gobby, but it failed when linking.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
* Other
    -  Contacted various publishers
        - Davvi Girji: will look at the contracts and give an answer after easter.
        - Báhko (Lule Sámi): Bård Eriksen will discuss the contract with some other
    in Árran, and give his answer after that.
        - DAT is fine with the contract, will compile an address list and send it
    to us.
        - NSI: Audhild Schanche will discuss our request with her co-workers, but
    presumes there would be no problems.

##  Maaren
* will be on sick leave throughout April

##  Saara
* Create a parallel corpora of the new testaments.
* change the name of `gt/` to `gtbound/` and add a symbolic link.
    - done. the scripts are not yet updated.
* fix the email address for corpus upload.
    - done.
* add more texts to the graphical corpus interface
* grammatical searchability in the graphical corpus interface
* add utf-8 check to xml-validation of the corpus files.
    - not done.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* Follow up the lawyer treatment of the contracts
    - nothing
* Follow up on place names from Norge Digitalt
    - nothing
* Evaluate SFST as speller (and analyzer) lexicon
    - nothing
* write a background document on the corpus contracts
    - nothing
* public tender:
    - answer requests/questions
        - wrote a lengthy e-mail formulated as a FAQ
    - corpus repo access to free texts (with **Børre**)
        - not done yet
* conversion of corpus repo summary xml to Forrest xml
    - nothing last week
* call EDD/**Christian Emil Ore** about national place name lexicon
    - not done
* risten.no/proper noun lexicon development:
    - refactor code
        - done some
    - implement inheritance/collection overriding for css using sitemaps
        - done also for CSS now
    - code design for XQueries needed for dict/term editing
        - some initial discussions in the newsgroup, based on the file naming schemes
    and inheritance/override system
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Thomas
* add incoming Lule Sámi words
**added a few
* work on North Sámi compounding and derivation
**nothing
* smj G3 issue
**nothing
* sme G3 issue
**nothing
* translate stopword list into smj (aligner; list from **Trond**)
**finished
* assist **Trond** and **Linda** with the smj disamb work
**assisted

##  Tomi
* move aspell UTF-8 suffix bug to Bugzilla
**not done
* Document aspell infrastructure: finish doc/proof/spelling/X-spell/aspell.xml
  (it's almost done, but there are a couple of loose ends)
    - not done
* new proper name lexicon
    - implement data synchronisation of proper nouns between risten.no and CVS
        - done some
    - XQuery refactoring and code development for our proper noun editor
        - started
    - new version of xml2lexc (based on ccat), should handle complex names correct:
   construct entries like we have now from the different parts of a complex name
   entry
***not done
* read aligner docu, install, provide feedback
    - not done
* translate stopword list into sme (aligner; list from **Trond**)
    - done
* install and test Gobby, install new version of SEE
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Trond
* Translate anchor list into nno, work on sme, fin.
    - Not done for nno (which I think should be conflated with nob), but worked
   quite substantially on sme, fin, and looked through smj. The lists are now
    - good enough to be used for development, they only need correction.
* Add the anchor list translations to cvs
    - Done (the naming is not consistent: anchor.txt contains eng-nob-sme-fin, and 
   anchor-eng-nob-smj.txt contains what it is called.
* remove deleted files from the CVS repository (in the Attic)
    - Forgot that.
* grammatical searchability in the graphical corpus interface: revise taglist
    - Not done.
* better smj NT text
    - Not done.
* Prepare a list of good candicates for first inclusion into the corpus.
    - Not done
* translate Northern Sámi lists and sets to Lule Sámi
    - What was this?
* work on semantically based sets (sme, smj)
    - Minor work done.
* start and lead discussion and work on semantic features for disamb
    - Not done.
* Install Gobby with support programs, see, etc.
    - Installed all the prerequisites, plan to ask Børre to help me out on this one
* get a key for Maaren in May
    - Not done.
* install aligner, test it and give feedback
    - Not done.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
    - Not done.

# 3. Documentation

TODO:
* documentation on how to apply for a user account for the corpus repo
  (**Børre**)
    -  Not done

# 4. Corpus gathering

## Collecting

See a [previous meeting memo](Meeting_2006-01-16) for what's to be done.

TODO: Send out the rest of the letters (**Børre**)

## Odin

**Sæth** replied by e-mail, hasn't had time to follow-up, but will try to
include us in their plans.

## Olavi Korhonen's Lule Sámi dictionary.

* No news this week

##  KIO Grafisk and the Iđut books

**TODO**:
* send letters to the authors (**Børre**)
* wait for the discussions with Davvi Girji

## Bible texts

We will get text from Finland, but still haven't received any. We have got the
Swedish text from Sweden. As for the last html versions from Norway, **Trond**
has not contacted them last week. 

TODO:
* convert smj NT to paratext (**Børre**)
* get fin and swe NT and OT in **paratext** format. (**Trond**)

## Min Áigi

Had a meeting last week, nothing heard of it yet.

## Kåfjord

Contacted us last week, they would like to give us texts. Excellent initiative
(we didn't contact them)! They were told to use the web interface, and contact
us again if there are problems.

# 5. Corpus infrastructure

TODO:
* remove deleted files from the CVS repository (**Trond**, still not done.)
* we need to develop strong enough security routines for the G5 to fulfill our
  obligations towards the text licensers
    - move this to bugzilla (**Børre**, not done yet.)
* add UTF-8 check as part of the validation (**Saara**, not finished yet)
    - Will file a bug report to Bz and continue the work.

## Changes and updates because of the Divvun public tender

User account admin and infra: see [previous
  memo|/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-03-06.html].

TODO: see above under *Documentation.*

Automatic build of the content of our corpus repo: also see [previous
  memo|/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-03-06.html].

TODO:
* convert from that xml to Forrest document format (**Sjur**)
    - nothing last week
* integrate the final Forrest documents into Forrest, and make sure it gets
  published (**Børre**)
    - waiting for the above
* make free texts available
    - zip up the xml files in gtfree/ and put it up on the Divvun download area
   [http://www.divvun.no/downloads/] (**Saara**, **Børre**,
   DEADLINE: Thursday 6.4.)
    - also provide an xml-free version? I.e. only paragraphs, whatever, as given by
   ccat
    - done weekly by a cron script (but only if there are new files) (**Saara**)
    - e-mail Finnut about the availability of the free corpus, and the download
   link (**Sjur**, **Børre** if Sjur goes on paternal leave)

## Free and non-free texts

More info in a [previous meeting
memo.|/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-03-13.html]

TODO:
* update scripts to handle this dichotomy. (**Saara**)
    - done
* gt/ vs gtbound/: change to gtbound/, add symbolic link from gt/ to gtbound/
  (**Saara**)
    - done
* we need to rerun the conversion, and add/check copyright/license status
    - add license info (**Børre**, DEADLINE: Tuesday 4.4.)
    - rerun conversion (**Saara**, DEADLINE: Wednesday 5.4.)

## Linking parallel files

How do we know that two (or more) files are parallel language versions of each
other? Suggestions:

One option:
```
samefilename.sme.doc.xml
samefilename.nob.doc.xml

nno/facta/samefilename.nno.html.xml
sme/facta/samefilename.sme.html.xml <== parallel file

sme/facta/somefilename.html.xml <== file in one lg only
```
The other option: to store the parallel files as links in the meta info/header
Then we can keep the original filename.

Should we allow for more than one file at a time when uploading? Use cases:
parallel texts, chapters in a book, many documents from the same author.
**Saara** will think about it, and discuss/propose something in the newsgroup.

DECISION:
We'll keep the original filename, and store linking info in the header (has to
be added manually). **Saara** will develop the web interface for uploading to
make it easier to add several documents in one go (as a serial process).

## More texts to the graphical corpus interface:

TODO:
* We would like to have more than the NT in the graphical interface (**Saara**)
* We would like to have grammatical searchability, not only POS. (**Saara**,
  **Trond**
* This presupposes a discussion with Oslo. (**Trond** to start discussion 
  and **Trond** and **Saara**  to continue
* For Lule Sámi: We would like to have a parallel corpus interface with NT
  (text only). This presupposes better quality texts (**Trond, Børre**)
    - Better Lule NT text still not made.
* preparations: gather more texts (we are doing this)
* Review the tag list and have it ready for inclusion (gt/cwb/korpustags.txt)
  (**Trond, Linda**)
* Prepare a list of good candicates for first inclusion into the corpus.
  (**Trond, Linda**)

Top-two priorities:
1.  Linda and Trond to go through the taglist
1.  Saara and Trond to contact Anders in 0slo

## Text upload

TODO:
* Ask for email-address: corpus@giellatekno.uit.no (**Børre**)
    - done
* Make a setup for this email address so that it goes to **Børre**, and then
  turn on the procedure (**Saara**)
    - done, but not tested on the real server
        - now also tested, and working

## Language recognition

As a work-around before Finnish recognition is reliable, treat all "Finnish"
sections as North Sámi (we don't yet have any Finnish texts(?)). We need to be
able to recognise the other languages, to remove noise, to identify parallel
texts in teh same docu, etc.

TODO:
* turn on language recognition, skipping Finnish (**Saara**)

# 6. Infrastructure

## Aligner

Today, we have two anchor files in addition to the original one. 

TODO:
* Read documentation and try out, give feedback to Bergen. (**Trond**,
  **Saara**, **Tomi**)
    - **Trond** to send relevant documents to **Tomi**.
* Translate the anchor list **anchor-eng-nor.txt** into sme (and fin?)
  (**Tomi**), and into smj (**Thomas** or **Anders Urheim**) (and nno?
  **Trond**). Note that the format is "lang1 / lang2", and that the number of
  lines should be kept in order to make it possible to move from one language to
  the next.
    - done for all but nno
    - nno should be conflated with nob into 'nor' (**Trond**)
* **Saara** to install the aligner, everyone to read the documentation
* Add the anchor list translations to cvs (**Trond**)
    - add to cvs location: gt/common/src/anchor.txt
        - done
    - "eng / nob / sme / smj / fin".
   word / ord* / sátni*, sáni* / sana*, sanoj*
* Move smj to the anchor.txt file, so that we get eng/nor/sme/smj/fin. 
  (**Trond**)

## Hyphenator

TODO:
* make target for the hyphenator(s)
    - done
* add a web interface to the hyphenator
    - done
* correct hyphenation of word boundaries and exceptions (**Sjur, Trond**)
* add a possibility to upload whole documents for hyphenation (and also
  analysis, generation, etc) (**Saara**)
* we should log all and every word/text uploaded/hyphenated/analyzed etc
    - we'll do it, but it does not have first priority (**Saara**)

# 7. Linguistics

## General - hyphenation

We need to add word boundaries in our lexicons. All compounds need explicit word
boundary markers, which will go to ` 0 ` in the regular transducer. It will go
to ` - ` or # in a specially made hyphenation transducer, which will
include the rules made by Trond (see: `gt/sme/src/hyph-sme.txt`).

It is not clear how this will be done, but **Sjur** has ideas.

Problematic word boundaries:
```
CVCV#CVCV  OK CV-CV-CV-CV  need no fix
CVCVC#CVCV OK CV-CVC-CV-CV need no fix
CVCVC#VCV  !! *CV-CV-C#V-CV -> CV-CVC#V-CV <= manually fix only these
```

Exceptions:
```
geografiija     ge-og-ra-fii-ja
Voionmaa        Voion-maa  => Voi-on-maa (oi no diphth)
 tak-si-eaig-gi :-)
```

These needs to be marked in the lexicons in each case, probably something like:
```
geo^grafiija
Voi^on#maa      Voi^on#maa
geo^grafiija    geo^gra-fii-ja
torne^träsk     tor-ne^träsk
  -- or --
torne#träsk     tor-ne#träsk
```

We need to introduce one new symbol: ^:0

Goal: Analyse divvunáhkus as div-vun#áh-kus and not as div-vu-náh-kus.
That is, to preserve the word boundary from the lexicon in the output, but keep
the output as word form, not as stem/baseform+analysis. The following is a
suggestion on how to process the input (bottom) to arrive at the wanted output.
Start reading from below, and upwards.

```
output level
twh upper divvun#áhkus <= first analysis  how do you get this transducer?
twh lower divvunáhkus  <= text input

hyp upper div-vun#áh-kus => hyph-sme.fst    ok, we know this one
twh lower divvun#áhkus

twl lower divvun#áh0ku0s  => twolhash-sme.bin      #:# ^:^, not #:0 ^:0
twl upper divvun#áhkkuX4s                       \
                                                   smehash.fst
lex lower divvun#áhkkuX4s                       /
lex upper divvun#áhkku+N+Sg+Loc => sme.save

----- mirror: below, regular order, above mirrored order

lex upper divvun#áhkku+N+Sg+Loc => sme.save
lex lower divvun#áhkkuX4s                      \
                                                   sme.fst
twl upper divvun#áhkkuX4s  =>   twol-sme.bin    /
twl lower divvun0áh0ku0s   
input level
```

TODO:
* add all word boundaries and exception hyphenation marks (**Thomas**)
    - Done: The noun file a-h (only word boundaries?)
* Set up the mechanism for the hash transducer package. (**Sjur, Tomi, Trond**)

OPEN questions:
* what about compound names?
    - The compound boundaries should be added to the propernoun lexicon
* loan words breaking Sámi syllable structure Voionmaa, 
  Bur^ås  Bu-rås, Stein-vik-sholm *Steinviks#holm Stein-viks%holm
    - Also here, boundaries should be added. The transducer should be equipped with
   at least some foreign phonotactic rules. We restrict the markup to ^ for now,
   as word boundaries of foreign words are normally not visible to the Sámi
   grammar.
* do we want to differentiate between degrees of (mental) lexicalisation?
  It isn't needed for hyphenation, but can be useful when decomposing compounds
  for IR and other purposes.

DECISION:
* use # and ^ for all compounds and hyphenation points in the lexicon
* later find a way to generate without having to spaecify # and ^ (this is also
  a problem today for a subset of the words)

## North Sámi

### Semantic feature system

Further discussion and details in the [previous meeting
memos|/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-03-20.html]
[memos](/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-03-27.html)

## Lule Sámi

TODO:
* add the rest of the inc- words (**Thomas**)
    - done, still some more
* translate Northern Sámi lists and sets to Lule Sámi
  (**Linda, Trond**, will be postponed till we have done more on smehash.)

# 8. Name lexicon infrastructure

TODO:
1. refactor and prepare risten.no for multiple collections:
    1. develop the Cocoon sitemap to delegate requests to the proper folder level,
   such that the most specific code is always used (**Sjur**)
        1. Done, now also for CSS, thus complete
    1. refactor the code into more and more specific components according to our
   folder hierarchy (**Tomi, Sjur**)
1. develop the needed XQueries and interface (**Sjur, Tomi**)
1. data synchronisation between risten.no and the cvs repo (**Tomi**)
    1. commiting is moving forward
1. test and review when ready

# 9. Spellers

Nothing until the new proper noun lexicon is in place. We don't have enough
people to do both.

# 10. Other

## Easter vacation/absenses

|    Who?    | When?
| --- | --- 
|  **Børre** | from the 10th to the 12th of April
|  **Saara** | at work normally
|  **Sjur**  | no vacation, possibly paternal leave
|  **Thomas**| from the 10th to the 12th of April, 3 days
|  **Tomi**  | from the 10th to the 12th of April, might be at work offline
|  **Trond** | don't know yet

No meeting during easter.

## Gobby

TODO:
* install and test it, to prepare for cooperation with non-Mac users (use case:
  Lars Nygård in Oslo) (**Børre, Tomi, Trond**, if it works ok then also the
  others)

## SubEthaEdit update

TODO:
* upgrade [SEE](http://www.codingmonkeys.de/subethatedit/)
  (**Børre, Tomi, Thomas**)
* install jspwiki mode from **Sjur** (**all interested**)

## Bug fixing

**35** open Divvun/Disamb bugs, and **25** risten.no bugs

## Min Áigi letters

There are four texts on language correction, two interesting to us:
* genitive and spelling of "puma"
* why are there so few "ordinary" words in risten.no? Risten/SD should answer.

## Key to the G5 room

All Tromsø people need access to **Børre's** office, to be able to initiate
group video conferences, but only Børre and Trond has it.

TODO:
* give/upgrade keys to Tomi and Thomas as well (**Trond**)

# 11. Summary, task list

##  Børre
* send out contracts with accompanying letter
* Gather public texts, preferrably also parallel ones
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
* convert nob and nno bible texts to be used as part of a parallel corpus
* review the paratext2xml converter
* convert smj NT to paratext
* Send out letters to the Iđut authors
* Add corpus security re G5 syncing as an issue to Bugzilla
* write  docu for how to apply for a corpus user account (forms, recipients,
  etc)
* remove old corpus files from gt/sme/corp/ after **Trond** has cleaned it
* integrate generated corpus repository summaries in the Forrest site
* install and test Gobby, install new version of SEE
* make free texts available
    - add license info  DEADLINE: Tuesday 4.4.)
    - zip up the xml files in gtfree/ and put it up on the Divvun download area
   [http://www.divvun.no/downloads/](DEADLINE: Thursday 6.4.)
    - also provide an xml-free version? 
    - possibly e-mail Finnut about the resource (if **Sjur** goes on paternal
   leave)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Maaren
* on sick leave throughout April

##  Saara
* Create a parallel corpora of the new testaments.
* add more texts to the graphical corpus interface
* grammatical searchability in the graphical corpus interface
* file a bug report of utf-8 check in xml-validation of the corpus files.
* make free texts available
    - rerun conversion (DEADLINE: Wednesday 5.4.)
    - zip up the xml files in gtfree/ and put it up on the Divvun download area
   [http://www.divvun.no/downloads/] (DEADLINE: Thursday 6.4.)
    - also provide an xml-free version? 
    - set up a weekly cron script (but only if there are new files)
* Discuss: allow for more than one file at a time when uploading a file.
* Implement links to parallel files in corpus header.
* Turn on language recognition, skipping Finnish
* add a possibility to upload whole documents for hyphenation (and also
  analysis, generation, etc)
* add a log of every word/text uploaded/hyphenated/analyzed etc.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* Follow up the lawyer treatment of the contracts
* Follow up on place names from Norge Digitalt
* Evaluate SFST as speller (and analyzer) lexicon
* write a background document on the corpus contracts
* public tender:
    - answer requests/questions
    - corpus repo access to free texts (with **Børre**)
* e-mail Finnut about the availability of the free corpus and the download link
* conversion of corpus repo summary xml to Forrest xml
* call EDD/**Christian Emil Ore** about national place name lexicon
* risten.no/proper noun lexicon development:
    - refactor code
    - code design for XQueries needed for dict/term editing
* correct hyphenation of word boundaries and exceptions
* Set up the mechanism for the hash-mark transducer package
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Thomas
* add incoming Lule Sámi words
* work on North Sámi compounding and derivation
* smj G3 issue
* sme G3 issue
* add all word boundaries and exception hyphenation marks
* SubEthaEdit update

##  Tomi
* move aspell UTF-8 suffix bug to Bugzilla
* Document aspell infrastructure: finish doc/proof/spelling/X-spell/aspell.xml
  (it's almost done, but there are a couple of loose ends)
* new proper name lexicon
    - implement data synchronisation of proper nouns between risten.no and CVS
    - XQuery refactoring and code development for our proper noun editor
    - new version of xml2lexc (based on ccat), should handle complex names correct:
   construct entries like we have now from the different parts of a complex name
   entry
* read aligner docu, install, provide feedback
* install and test Gobby, install new version of SEE
* Set up the mechanism for the hash-mark transducer package
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Trond
* Unify anchor lists, and conflate nno and nob into nor
* remove deleted files from the CVS repository (in the Attic)
* grammatical searchability in the graphical corpus interface: revise taglist
* better smj NT text, get fin and swe NT texts
* Prepare a list of good candicates for first inclusion into the corpus.
* start and lead discussion and work on semantic features for disamb
* Install Gobby
* get a key for **Maaren** in May
* install aligner, test it and give feedback
* correct hyphenation of word boundaries and exceptions
* Set up the mechanism for the hash-mark transducer package
* get/upgrade keys for **Børre's** room for **Tomi** and **Thomas**
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).

# 12. Next meeting, closing

18.04.2006 09:30

**Sjur** is on paternal leave.

Closed at 12:47
