# Meeting setup

* Date: 09.05.2006
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Where we are
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat

# Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from two weeks ago
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. name lexicon infrastructure
1. Spellers
1. Other issues
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 10:00.

Present: **Børre, Saara, Sjur, Thomas, Trond, Tomi**

Absent: **Maaren**

Main secretary: **Sjur**

Agenda accepted as is.

# 2. Reviewing the task list from the last meeting

##  Børre
* send out contracts with accompanying letter
    - Two contracts signed, hurray!
* Gather public texts, preferrably also parallel ones
    -  Done
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
    -  Not done
* convert nob and nno bible texts to be used as part of a parallel corpus
    -  Not done
* review the paratext2xml converter
    -  Not done
* convert smj NT to paratext
    -  Not done
* Send out letters to the Iđut authors
    -  Not done
* write  docu for how to apply for a corpus user account (forms, recipients,
  etc)
    -  Not done
* remove old corpus files from gt/sme/corp/ after **Trond** has cleaned it
    -  Status?
* integrate generated corpus repository summaries in the Forrest site
    -  This is done
* mirror Odin URL (create cron task to do it automatically?)
    -  Not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    -  243 is fixed …

##  Maaren
* on sick leave throughout April

##  Saara
* Create a parallel corpora of the new testaments.
* add more texts to the graphical corpus interface
* grammatical searchability in the graphical corpus interface
* make free texts available
    - set up a weekly cron script (but only if there are new files)
        - move this to bugzilla
* Implement links to parallel files in corpus header.
    - not done
* Implement parallel corpus upload in web upload script
    - not ready
* Implement turning off the language recognition in the xsl-file
  (and corpus.dtd).
    - not ready
* Refine language recognition
    - not ready
* add a possibility to upload whole documents for hyphenation (and also
  analysis, generation, etc)
* add a log of every word/text uploaded/hyphenated/analyzed etc.
    - I'll move these to bugzilla.
* Investigate the decomposed Unicode characters in file names -problem.
    - Found no solution.
* Convert Min Áigi file names.
    - Done, but the decomposed characters are left as is.
* Convert Min Áigi documents
    - Converted 2005 and 2006. The character conversion for text files
   is not properly implemented yet, so there is still some more work.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* read through and evaluate the public tender offers
    - done, still more work

##  Thomas
* add all word boundaries
    - done
* work on compounding and derivation
    - begun to work again
* smj G3 issue
    - nothing
* sme G3 issue
    - nothing

##  Tomi
* move aspell UTF-8 suffix bug to Bugzilla
    - Not done
* Document aspell infrastructure: finish doc/proof/spelling/X-spell/aspell.xml
  (it's almost done, but there are a couple of loose ends)
    - Not done
* new proper name lexicon
    - implement data synchronisation of proper nouns between risten.no and CVS
        - Not done
    - XQuery refactoring and code development for our proper noun editor
        - Not done
    - new version of xml2lexc (based on ccat), should handle complex names correct:
   construct entries like we have now from the different parts of a complex name
   entry
        - Not done
* read aligner docu, install, provide feedback
    - Not done
* install and test Gobby, install new version of SEE
    - Not done
* Set up the mechanism for the hash-mark transducer package
    - Not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)
    - Fixed some

##  Trond
* Make nob into nor in the anchor list (A, B, C is done)
    - Now all done.
* better smj NT text, get fin NT texts
    - Not done
* Discuss Gobby 0.4 with Sjur
    - Done, there is no 0.4, only 0.3, is testing it out with different people,
   now also looking at AbiWord.
* get a key for **Maaren** in May
    - Will get one today, another on Thursday
* install aligner, test it and give feedback
    - Not done.
* correct hyphenation of word boundaries and exceptions with Thomas
    - We did something.
* get/upgrade keys for **Børre's** room for **Tomi** and **Thomas**
    - Got the key numbers, but not upgraded yet.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
    - Not done.

# 3. Documentation

TODO:
* documentation on how to apply for a user account for the corpus repo
  (**Børre**)
    -  The item will be moved to the TODO list, again.

# 4. Corpus gathering

**Trond** added **sme** beuraucratic texts, roughly 0,4 mill words, total size
now approaching 1,5 mill words.

##  Trip to Sámi municipalities

**Børre** back from his trip.

* Min  Áigi
    - 3-4 years of texts ready, both uncorrected and corrected (with bullet)
* Sámi parliament
* Tana
* Isak Saba guovddáš (Nesseby, talked with Signe Iversen)
* Utsjoki (a lot of admin texts)
    - pdf files as free texts
    - orig MS Word files require a closed contract (and a Finnish language version
   of the contract)
* Sámi ráđđi (Utsjoki)
* Inari (Sámi parliament)
    - got four texts, will ask for more
* Giellagas instituhtta (Oulu, talked with Seija Risten Somby)

The Isak Saba guovddaš will not sign unless the contract is in Sámi, and they
are sceptical to giving texts to the project for free. Maaren (and Trond)
translated the A contract to Sámi yesterday.

Note to be placed somewhere:

[http://www.oqaasileriffik.gl/dk/ Greenland's language secretariat] have a
paradigm generator based upon Xerox tools, we should ask for their source code.
(site in Greeenlandic, English and Danish).

The Min Áigi format should be dealt with: \@ingress etc should be dealt with for
the .txt, but business as usal for the .doc files. We should have \@code as
paragraphs, look at the rest. **Trond** to look at the format.

## Collecting

See a [previous meeting memo](Meeting_2006-01-16) for what's to be done.

TODO: Send out the rest of the letters (**Børre**)

Signed contracts since last meeting:
* NSI (=> a lot of Min Áigi and Áššu texts)
* Seija Risten Somby, giving her gradu-paper.

## Odin

**Sæth** replied by e-mail, hasn't had time to follow-up, but will try to
include us in their plans.

* **Børre** will weekly mirror the URL mentioned in Sæths e-mail,
  and add missing files to the corpus.


## Olavi Korhonen's Lule Sámi dictionary.

* No news this week

TODO: **Børre** to contact Olavi Korhonen and Kuhmunen

##  KIO Grafisk and the Iđut books

**TODO**:
* send letters to the authors (**Børre**)
* wait for the discussions with Davvi Girji
    -  A talk with Brita Kåven, revealed that they would have a look at
    the contracts **after** easter.

## Bible texts

We will get text from Finland, but still haven't received any. We have got the
Swedish text from Sweden. As for the last html versions from Norway, **Trond**
has not contacted them last week.

Swedish html has arrived, no paratext. Norsk bibelselskap has not sent
corrected New Testament versions for sme, and not paratext for nno/nob.

TODO:
* convert smj NT to paratext (**Børre**)
* get fin, swe, nob and nno NT and OT in **paratext** format. (**Trond**)

## Min Áigi

**Børre** has received texts, and forwarded them to **Trond**. Problems with
Unicode in the filenames, as the non-ASCII characters are unparsed strings with
the octal code of the character(s) in question:

The files (appr 2000 files) are added, here:
/usr/local/share/corp/orig/sme/news/MinAigi/

We have problems with Unicode characters in filenames. All characters with
diacritics are stored decomposed on MacOS X, and when transferring the files to
Linux (cochise) via a tar file, the characters are not recomposed, making the
files accessible only by typing the combining diacritic - not nice. We also now
have the same problem on Mac, making it in practice impossible to access a set
of files like:

```
a84-231-8-254:~ sjur$ l a+TAB
áda  áde  ádo  åde
a84-231-8-254:~ sjur$ l a
```

This was solved once before, and we need to look at this again. The old Bugzilla
issue should be reopened. The bug was reopened:
http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=76

**TODO**:
* **Børre** to contact **Per Christian Biti** on technical issues (how to
  transfer texts).
* reopen Bugzilla issue, and study the previous discussion and solution
  regarding Unicode characters in filenames (**Saara**)
* add filename extensions to files not having one
* investigate whether the bullet has a meaning or could be removed
* Space in file names should be changed to underscore (and not to hyphen!).

Min Áigi seems to have been changing from text files to MS Word around issue
015-05.

## Kåfjord

Promised to send us texts, but nothing has arrived yet.

**TODO**: **Børre** to contact them.

## Sámi Instituhtta

Audhild Schanche has signed the contract. We will have to contact them about
transferring the texts.

**TODO**: **Børre** to contact them.

# 5. Corpus infrastructure

https://giellalt.uit.no/lang/corp/corpus-summary.html

TODO:

## Changes and updates because of the Divvun public tender

User account admin and infra: see [previous
  memo|/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-03-06.html].

TODO: see above under *Documentation.*

Automatic build of the content of our corpus repo: also see [previous
  memo|/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-03-06.html].

TODO:
* make free texts available
    - done weekly by a cron script (but only if there are new files) (**Saara**)
        - move to bugzilla
* Make a link, easily available, to these texts.
    - done as a downloadable tar package.

Name change again?
```
gt -> gtbound/
gtbound -> some nifty new letter... ?
gtfree -> some nifty new letter... ?
```
**Trond** to come up with some new suggestion.

## Free and non-free texts

More info in a [previous meeting
memo.|/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-03-13.html]

TODO:
* Check the status of the texts, again. (**Børre, Trond, Saara**)
* Rerun the conversion afterwards (**Saara** is the one with the magic spell)
* check against bugs
  [273](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=273) and
  [272](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=272)

## More texts to the graphical corpus interface:

TODO:
* We would like to have more than the NT in the graphical interface
 http://omilia.uio.no/CE/sami/ (**Saara**)
    - We add the largest texts first.
* We would like to have grammatical searchability, not only POS. (**Saara**,
  **Trond**)
* This presupposes a discussion with Oslo. (**Trond** and **Saara** to continue
  this discussion)
* For Lule Sámi: We would like to have a parallel corpus interface with NT
  (text only). This presupposes better quality texts (**Trond, Børre**)
    - Better Lule NT text still not made.
* The list of good candicates: The longest (admin) texts.
    - We need a ccat version of the script for analysing text, still keeping xml
   tags (**Tomi**).

Top-two priorities:
1. Trond and Saara to discuss with Lars.
1. Lars to add text to the server.
1. Tomi to prepare for the parallel corpus.

## Language recognition

TODO:
* refine language recognition (**Saara**)
    - in progress
* create a short word list to help the trigram heuristics
    - Trond has made such lists for all lgs except sme, smj and nob.
* send Saara sme, smj and nob files (sort, but not uniq -c) (**Trond**)
* Add some flag to write into the xsl file (**Saara**):
    - method:do not run lg recognition
    - method:Choose between these 2:nob, sme

# 6. Infrastructure

## Aligner

Today, we have two anchor files in addition to the original one.

TODO:
* Read documentation and try out, give feedback to Bergen. (**Trond**,
  **Saara**, **Tomi**)
* conflate nno with nob into 'nor' (**Trond**, letters a, b, c done)
    -  Partly done, must go through and see.
* **Saara** to install the aligner, everyone to read the documentation
    - done, waiting for the test files from Bergen.
* **Trond** and **Saara** will continue this issue.

## Hyphenator

Trond and Thomas have been updating the propernoun file with ^ tags. We need the
tag in front of compound parts beginning in a vowel or in two or more
consonants. Compound parts beginning with one consonant are handled correctly.

TODO:
* Remove the ^ signs from the UPPER level when generating (just like the TV and
  IV tags are removed today) (**Trond**)
    - done
* correct the treatment of hyphenation of word boundaries and exceptions (fst
  gymnastics) (**Sjur, Trond**)
    - Still not done.
* add a possibility to upload whole documents for hyphenation (and also
  analysis, generation, etc) (**Saara**)
* we should log all and every word/text uploaded/hyphenated/analyzed etc
    - we'll do it, but it does not have first priority (**Saara**)
* add exceptions marks to the `smj` lexicon (boks^távva)

# 7. Linguistics

## General - hyphenation

See discussion, open questions and decission in the [previous meeting
memo.|/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-04-03.html]

TODO:
* add all word boundaries (**Thomas**)
    -  Done
* Set up the mechanism for the hash transducer package - fst gymnastics, see
  above.
* Lule Sámi behaviour around -st- is still somewhat unclear. Trond has had a
  discussion with Anders Kintel and Thomas, it should continue.

## North Sámi

There are some heavy bugs:
* he(a)ddjiid is one
* compounding cleanup - no shortening when normative, still shortening when
  analysing corpus texts?
* vowel-shortening when compounding (we need the input from Pekka!)

We should have some linguistic workshops while Maaren is here.

```
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohku+N+SgNomCmp#itna+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Pl+Nom
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohku+N+SgNomCmp#itna+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Acc+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohku+N+SgNomCmp#itna+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Gen+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkin+N+SgGenCmp#doaibma+N+Pl+Nom
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkin+N+SgGenCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Acc+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkin+N+SgGenCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Gen+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkin+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Pl+Nom
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkin+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Acc+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkin+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Gen+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohku+N+SgNomCmp#itna+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Pl+Nom
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohku+N+SgNomCmp#itna+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Acc+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohku+N+SgNomCmp#itna+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Gen+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkin+N+SgGenCmp#doaibma+N+Pl+Nom
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkin+N+SgGenCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Acc+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkin+N+SgGenCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Gen+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkin+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Pl+Nom
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkin+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Acc+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkin+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Gen+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohku+N+SgNomCmp#itna+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Pl+Nom
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohku+N+SgNomCmp#itna+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Acc+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohku+N+SgNomCmp#itna+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Gen+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkin+N+SgGenCmp#doaibma+N+Pl+Nom
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkin+N+SgGenCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Acc+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkin+N+SgGenCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Gen+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkin+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Pl+Nom
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkin+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Acc+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkin+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Gen+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkit+V+TV+Actio#doaibma+N+Pl+Nom
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkit+V+TV+Actio#doaibma+N+Sg+Acc+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkit+V+TV+Actio#doaibma+N+Sg+Gen+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkit+V+TV+Actio#doaibma+N+Pl+Nom
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkit+V+TV+Actio#doaibma+N+Sg+Acc+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkit+V+TV+Actio#doaibma+N+Sg+Gen+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkit+V+TV+Actio#doaibma+N+Pl+Nom
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkit+V+TV+Actio#doaibma+N+Sg+Acc+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkit+V+TV+Actio#doaibma+N+Sg+Gen+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkit+V+TV+N+Actio+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Pl+Nom
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkit+V+TV+N+Actio+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Acc+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehtu+N+SgNomCmp#juohkit+V+TV+N+Actio+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Gen+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehto#juohkin+N+SgGenCmp#doaibma+N+Pl+Nom
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehto#juohkin+N+SgGenCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Acc+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehto#juohkin+N+SgGenCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Gen+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehto#juohkin+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Pl+Nom
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehto#juohkin+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Acc+PxSg2
diehtojuohkindoaimmat   diehto#juohkin+N+SgNomCmp#doaibma+N+Sg+Gen+PxSg2
```

After postprocessing, obeying Karlsson's law (choose the wordform with the least
compound boundaries) it is reduced to:

```
"<diehtojuohkindoaimmat>"
         "diehtojuohkin#doaibma" N Sg Acc PxSg2
         "diehtojuohkin#doaibma" N Pl Nom
         "diehtojuohkin#doaibma" N Sg Gen PxSg2
```

## Lule Sámi

TODO:
* add the rest of the inc- words (**Thomas**)
    - everything added that is possible now, about 50 unknown words left+2 abbr.
   +moaddi etc (numerals)
* There are some open issues in the marginal area of the smj transducer:
    - numerals, e.g. These become more visible as we get real texts.
    - names
    - compounds? Shortening here as well, but not in written language (some
   lexicalised exceptions, as in sme)
    - loanwords?

# 8. Name lexicon infrastructure

TODO:
1. refactor and prepare risten.no for multiple collections:
    1.  refactor the code into more and more specific components according to our
    folder hierarchy (**Tomi, Sjur**)
        1. things are moving forward
1. write down the most common editing scenarios (to be used as guides for making
  the editing interface) (adding / changing ) (**Trond, Tomi**)
1. develop the needed XQueries and interface (**Sjur, Tomi**)
    1.  developing
1. data synchronisation between risten.no and the cvs repo (**Tomi**)
    1.  nothing this week
1. test and review when ready
1. Rethink the doubletagging procedure for names, consider grammatically
  motivated semtag conversion routines ("Helsinki" from Plc to Obj to Org)
  (**Trond**)

# 9. Spellers

Nothing until the new proper noun lexicon is in place. We don't have enough
people to do both. Here's our most important targets for spellers in the near
future:

* aspell
* hunspell

# 10. Public tender

TODO:
* read the offers (**Børre, Sjur, Trond, Tomi**)
* meet on Tuesday 13 to sum up the findings (**Børre, Sjur, Tomi, Trond**)
* telephone meeting next Wednesday with Finnut (**Børre, Sjur**)

# 11. Other

## Bug fixing

**50** open Divvun/Disamb bugs, and **25** risten.no bugs

Please help Saara with bug 279. Not much help...
Saara will contact Roy on this issue.

After the corpus issues have been somewhat settled, we should do a bug
barnraising. ... and then a new one after the name lexicon is fixed.

##  Move to victorio

xerox tools: update PATH to
```
/opt/sami/xerox/c-fsm/ix86-linux2.6-gcc3.4/bin/
/opt/sami/xerox/c-fsm/ix86-linux2.6-gcc3.4/lib/
```

Victorio still does not compile, despite a path fix, cf. bug #282.

```
        - Building sme.save ***

printf "compile-source sme/src/sme-lex.txt sme/src/adv-sme-lex.txt ... \n\
read-rules sme/bin/twol-sme.bin \n\
compose-result \n\
save-result sme/bin/sme.save \n\
quit \n" > tmp/save-script
lexc -utf8 < tmp/save-script
/bin/sh: lexc: command not found
make: *** [sme/bin/sme.save] Error 127
```

# 12. Summary, task list

##  Børre
* send out contracts with accompanying letter
* Gather public texts, preferrably also parallel ones
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
* convert nob and nno bible texts to be used as part of a parallel corpus
* review the paratext2xml converter
* convert smj NT to paratext
* Send out letters to the Iđut authors
* write  docu for how to apply for a corpus user account (forms, recipients,
  etc)
* remove old corpus files from gt/sme/corp/ after **Trond** has cleaned it
* mirror Odin URL (create cron task to do it automatically?)
* read & evaluate received offers
* telephone meeting Wednesday with Finnut
* Check the status & license of the corpus texts
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Maaren
* Reso

##  Saara
* Create a parallel corpora of the new testaments.
* add more texts to the graphical corpus interface
* grammatical searchability in the graphical corpus interface
* move to bugzilla:
    - set up a weekly cron script to make free texts available
    - add a possibility to upload whole documents for hyphenation (and also
   analysis, generation, etc)
    - add a log of every word/text uploaded/hyphenated/analyzed etc.
* Implement links to parallel files in corpus header.
* Implement parallel corpus upload in web upload script
* Implement turning off the language recognition in the xsl-file (and corpus.dtd).
* Refine language recognition
* Investigate the decomposed Unicode characters in file names -problem.
* Correct decomposed Unicode in Min Áigi file names
* Check the status & license of the corpus texts
* Rerun corpus conversion
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* read & evaluate received offers
* telephone meeting Wednesday with Finnut
* fst gymnastics to add hyphenation and word boundary marks to hyphenation transducer
* name lexicon:
    - implement editing functions
    - write down the most common editing scenarios, to guide development

##  Thomas
* correct hyphenation of exceptions
* correct hyphenation of smj -st-
* work on compounding and derivation
* smj G3 issue
* sme G3 issue

##  Tomi
* move to Bugzilla:
    - aspell UTF-8 suffix bug
    - Document aspell infrastructure: finish doc/proof/spelling/X-spell/aspell.xml
   (it's almost done, but there are a couple of loose ends)
* new proper name lexicon
    - implement data synchronisation of proper nouns between risten.no and CVS
    - XQuery refactoring and code development for our proper noun editor
    - new version of xml2lexc (based on ccat), should handle complex names correct:
   construct entries like we have now from the different parts of a complex name
   entry
    - write down the most common editing scenarios (to be used as guides for making
   the editing interface) (adding / changing )
* read aligner docu, install, provide feedback
* install and test Gobby, install new version of SEE
* Set up the mechanism for the hash-mark transducer package
* read & evaluate received offers
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Trond
* better smj NT text, get fin NT texts
* get a key for **Maaren** in May
* install aligner, test it and give feedback
* correct hyphenation of word boundaries and exceptions with Thomas
* fst gymnastics to add hyphenation and word boundary marks to hyphenation transducer
* get/upgrade keys for **Børre's** room for **Tomi** and **Thomas**
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).
* Rethink the doubletagging procedure for names, consider grammatically
  motivated semtag conversion routines ("Helsinki" from Plc to Obj to Org)
* write down the most common editing scenarios (to be used as guides for making
  the editing interface) (adding / changing )
* read & evaluate received offers
* Check the status & license of the corpus texts

# 13. Next meeting, closing

15.05.2006 09:30

Closed at 11:18
