# Meeting setup

* Date: 24.04.2006
* Time: 09.30 Norw. time
* Place: Where we are
* Tools: SubEthaEdit, iChat

# Agenda

1. Opening, agenda review
1. Reviewing the task list from two weeks ago
1. Documentation - divvun.no
1. Corpus gathering
1. Corpus infrastructure
1. Infrastructure
1. Linguistics
1. name lexicon infrastructure
1. Spellers
1. Other issues
1. Summary, task lists
1. Closing

# 1. Opening, agenda review, participants

Opened at 11:11.

Present: **Saara, Sjur, Thomas, Trond**

Absent: **Børre**, **Maaren** (sick leave), **Tomi**

Main secretary: **Trond**

Agenda accepted as is.

# 2. Reviewing the task list from the last meeting

##  Børre
* send out contracts with accompanying letter
* Gather public texts, preferrably also parallel ones
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
* convert nob and nno bible texts to be used as part of a parallel corpus
* review the paratext2xml converter
* convert smj NT to paratext
* Send out letters to the Iđut authors
* write  docu for how to apply for a corpus user account (forms, recipients,
  etc)
* remove old corpus files from gt/sme/corp/ after **Trond** has cleaned it
* integrate generated corpus repository summaries in the Forrest site
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Maaren
* on sick leave throughout April

##  Saara
* Create a parallel corpora of the new testaments.
* make free texts available
    - set up a weekly cron script (but only if there are new files)
        - not done
* Implement links to parallel files in corpus header.
    - not done
* Implement parallel corpus upload in web upload script
    - in progress
* Implement turning off the language recognition in the xsl-file (and corpus.dtd).
    - almost ready
* Refine language detection
    - almost ready
* add a possibility to upload whole documents for hyphenation (and also
  analysis, generation, etc)
    - not done
* add a log of every word/text uploaded/hyphenated/analyzed etc.
    - not done
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* on paternal leave

##  Thomas
* add all word boundaries
    - working with lule-sámi word-boundaries for the moment
* work on compounding and derivation
    - nothing this week
* smj G3 issue
    - nothing this week
* sme G3 issue
    - nothing this week

##  Tomi
* move aspell UTF-8 suffix bug to Bugzilla
* Document aspell infrastructure: finish doc/proof/spelling/X-spell/aspell.xml
  (it's almost done, but there are a couple of loose ends)
* new proper name lexicon
    - implement data synchronisation of proper nouns between risten.no and CVS
    - XQuery refactoring and code development for our proper noun editor
    - new version of xml2lexc (based on ccat), should handle complex names correct:
   construct entries like we have now from the different parts of a complex name
   entry
* read aligner docu, install, provide feedback
* install and test Gobby, install new version of SEE
* Set up the mechanism for the hash-mark transducer package
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Trond
* Make nob into nor in the anchor list (A is done)
* better smj NT text, get fin NT texts
* Discuss Gobby 0.4 with Sjur
* get a key for **Maaren** in May
* install aligner, test it and give feedback
* correct hyphenation of word boundaries and exceptions with Thomas
* get/upgrade keys for **Børre's** room for **Tomi** and **Thomas**
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).

# 3. Documentation

TODO:
* documentation on how to apply for a user account for the corpus repo
  (**Børre**)
    -  The item will be moved to the TODO list, again.

# 4. Corpus gathering

**Trond** added **sme** beuraucratic texts, roughly 0,4 mill words, total size
now approaching 1,5 mill words.

##  Trip to Sámi municipalities

**Børre** is on his trip.

## Collecting

See a [previous meeting memo](Meeting_2006-01-16) for what's to be done.

TODO: Send out the rest of the letters (**Børre**)

## Odin

**Sæth** replied by e-mail, hasn't had time to follow-up, but will try to
include us in their plans.

* **Børre** will weekly mirror the URL mentioned in Sæths e-mail,
  and add missing files to the corpus.


## Olavi Korhonen's Lule Sámi dictionary.

* No news this week

TODO: **Børre** to contact Olavi Korhonen and Kuhmunen

##  KIO Grafisk and the Iđut books

**TODO**:
* send letters to the authors (**Børre**)
* wait for the discussions with Davvi Girji
    -  A talk with Brita Kåven, revealed that they would have a look at
    the contracts **after** easter.

## Bible texts

We will get text from Finland, but still haven't received any. We have got the
Swedish text from Sweden. As for the last html versions from Norway, **Trond**
has not contacted them last week.

Swedish html has arrived, no paratext. Norsk bibelselskap has not sent
corrected New Testament versions for sme, and not paratext for nno/nob.

TODO:
* convert smj NT to paratext (**Børre**)
    -  Not done
* get fin, swe, nob and nno NT and OT in **paratext** format. (**Trond**)
    -  Still no news

## Min Áigi

**Børre** has received texts, and forwarded them to **Trond**. Problems with
Unicode in the filenames, as the non-ASCII characters are unparsed strings with
the octal code of the character(s) in question:

The files (appr 2000 files) are added, here:
/usr/local/share/corp/orig/sme/news/MinAigi/

We have problems with Unicode characters in filenames. All characters with
diacritics are stored decomposed on MacOS X, and when transferring the files to
Linux (cochise) via a tar file, the characters are not recomposed, making the
files accessible only by typing the combining diacritic - not nice. We also now
have the same problem on Mac, making it in practice impossible to access a set
of files like:

```
a84-231-8-254:~ sjur$ l a+TAB
áda  áde  ádo  åde
a84-231-8-254:~ sjur$ l a
```

This was solved once before, and we need to look at this again. The old Bugzilla
issue should be reopened.

**TODO**:
* **Børre** to contact **Per Christian Biti** on technical issues (how to
  transfer texts).
* reopen Bugzilla issue, and study the previous discussion and solution
  regarding Unicode characters in filenames (**Saara**)
* add filename extensions to files not having one
* investigate whether the bullet has a meaning or could be removed
* Space in file names should be changed to underscore (and not to hyphen!).

Unicode table, in case we need to recompose manually:

```
á    0061 0301
č    0063 030C
đ    0064 0335
ŋ    006E
š    0073 030C
ŧ    0074 0335
ž    007A 030C
æ    00
ø    006F 0337
å    0061 030A
ö    006F 0308
ä    0061 0308
Á    0041 0301
Č    0043 030C
Đ    0044 0335
Ŋ    004E
Š    0053 030C
Ŧ    0054 0335
Ž    005A 030C
Æ    00
Ø    004F 0337
Å    0041 030A
Ö    004F 0308
Ä    0041 0308
```

Min Áigi seems to have been changing from text files to MS Word around issue
015-05.

## Kåfjord

Promised to send us texts, but nothing has arrived yet.

**TODO**: **Børre** to contact them.

## Sámi Instituhtta

Audhild Schanche has signed the contract. We will have to contact them about
transferring the texts.

**TODO**: **Børre** to contact them.

# 5. Corpus infrastructure

https://giellalt.uit.no/lang/corp/corpus-summary.html

TODO:

## Changes and updates because of the Divvun public tender

User account admin and infra: see [previous
  memo|/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-03-06.html].

TODO: see above under *Documentation.*

Automatic build of the content of our corpus repo: also see [previous
  memo|/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-03-06.html].

TODO:
* make free texts available
    - done weekly by a cron script (but only if there are new files) (**Saara**)
* Make a link, easily available, to these texts.
    - done as a downloadable tar package.

Name change again?
```
gt -> gtbound/
gtbound -> some nifty new letter... ?
gtfree -> some nifty new letter... ?
```
**Trond** to come up with some new suggestion.

## Free and non-free texts

More info in a [previous meeting
memo.|/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-03-13.html]

TODO:
* Check the status of the texts, again. (**Børre, Trond**)
* Rerun the conversion afterwards (**Saara** is the one with the magic spell)
* check against bugs [273](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=273) and
  [272](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=272)

## Linking parallel files

DECISION:
We'll keep the original filename, and store linking info in the header (has to
be added manually).

TODO:
* develop the web interface for uploading to make it easier to add several
  documents in one go. (**Saara**)

```
lg-a, lg-b
<p id>
<s id>
</s>
</p>

key file
eq-link# lga-1 = lgb-1,2
eq-link# lga-2 = lgb-3
eq-link# lga-2 = lgb-4
```

<s>...</s><.><s>...</s><?> <!>

sme-dis.rle: DELIMITERS
The preprocess and the aligner should agree on what is a sentence. (.!?)

<s>
... this is what sme-dis.rle will analyse
<.>
</s>
<!>
<?>

(sme-tdis.rle: DELIMITERS
<¶>)

## More texts to the graphical corpus interface:

TODO:
* We would like to have more than the NT in the graphical interface
 http://omilia.uio.no/CE/sami/ (**Saara**)
    - We add the largest texts first.
* We would like to have grammatical searchability, not only POS. (**Saara**,
  **Trond**)
* This presupposes a discussion with Oslo. (**Trond** and **Saara** to continue
  this discussion)
* For Lule Sámi: We would like to have a parallel corpus interface with NT
  (text only). This presupposes better quality texts (**Trond, Børre**)
    - Better Lule NT text still not made.
* The list of good candicates: The longest (admin) texts.
    - We need a ccat version of the script for analysing text, still keeping xml
   tags (**Tomi**).

Top-two priorities:
1. Trond and Saara to discuss with Lars.
1. Lars to add text to the server.
1. Tomi to prepare for the parallel corpus.

## Language recognition

TODO:
* turn on language recognition, skipping Finnish (**Saara**)
    - Done, it seems.
* create a short word list to help the trigram heuristics
    - Trond has made such lists for all lgs except sme, smj and nob.
* send Saara sme, smj and nob files (sort, but not uniq -c) (**Trond**)
* Add some flag to write into the xsl file (**Saara**):
    - method:do not run lg recognition
    - method:Choose between these 2:nob, sme

# 6. Infrastructure

## Aligner

Today, we have two anchor files in addition to the original one.

TODO:
* Read documentation and try out, give feedback to Bergen. (**Trond**,
  **Saara**, **Tomi**)
* conflate nno with nob into 'nor' (**Trond**, letters a, b, c done)
    -  Partly done, must go through and see.
* **Saara** to install the aligner, everyone to read the documentation
    - done, waiting for the test files from Bergen.
* **Trond** and **Saara** will continue this issue.

## Hyphenator

Trond and Thomas have been updating the propernoun file with ^ tags. We need the
tag in front of compound parts beginning in a vowel or in two or more
consonants. Compound parts beginning with one consonant are handled correctly.

TODO:
* Remove the ^ signs from the UPPER level when generating (just like the TV and
  IV tags are removed today) (**Trond**)
* correct the treatment of hyphenation of word boundaries and exceptions (fst
  gymnastics) (**Sjur, Trond**)
* add a possibility to upload whole documents for hyphenation (and also
  analysis, generation, etc) (**Saara**)
* we should log all and every word/text uploaded/hyphenated/analyzed etc
    - we'll do it, but it does not have first priority (**Saara**)
* add exceptions marks to the `smj` lexicon (boks^távva)

# 7. Linguistics

## General - hyphenation

See discussion, open questions and decission in the [previous meeting
memo.|/admin/weekly/2006/Meeting_2006-04-03.html]

TODO:
* add all word boundaries (**Thomas**)
    -  Done: All sme; smj nouns and adjectives
* Set up the mechanism for the hash transducer package - fst gymnastics, see
  above.

## North Sámi

Nothing specific this week.

## Lule Sámi

TODO:
* add the rest of the inc- words (**Thomas**)
    -  everything added that is possible now, about 50 unknown words left+2 abbr.
    +moaddi etc (numerals)


# 8. Name lexicon infrastructure

TODO:
1. refactor and prepare risten.no for multiple collections:
    1.  refactor the code into more and more specific components according to our
    folder hierarchy (**Tomi, Sjur**)
        1. things are moving forward
1. develop the needed XQueries and interface (**Sjur, Tomi**)
    1.  developing
1. data synchronisation between risten.no and the cvs repo (**Tomi**)
    1.  nothing this week
1. test and review when ready

Discussion postponed until Sjur is back.

# 9. Spellers

Nothing until the new proper noun lexicon is in place. We don't have enough
people to do both.

# 10. Public tender

2 offers received, from Polderland and Lingsoft.

TODO:
* read the offers (**Børre, Sjur, Trond, Tomi**)
* meet on Friday to sum up the findings (**Sjur, Tomi, Trond**)
* telephone meeting next Tuesday with Finnut (**Børre, Sjur**)

# 11. Other

## Bug fixing

**50** open Divvun/Disamb bugs, and **25** risten.no bugs

Please help Saara with bug 279. Not much help...

Saara will contact Roy on this issue.

After the corpus issues have been somewhat settled, we should do a bug
barnraising. ... and then a new one after the name lexicon is fixed.

# 12. Summary, task list

##  Børre
* send out contracts with accompanying letter
* Gather public texts, preferrably also parallel ones
* Continue converting text from input format to our xml
* convert nob and nno bible texts to be used as part of a parallel corpus
* review the paratext2xml converter
* convert smj NT to paratext
* Send out letters to the Iđut authors
* write  docu for how to apply for a corpus user account (forms, recipients,
  etc)
* remove old corpus files from gt/sme/corp/ after **Trond** has cleaned it
* integrate generated corpus repository summaries in the Forrest site
* mirror Odin URL (create cron task to do it automatically?)
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Maaren
* on sick leave throughout April

##  Saara
* Create a parallel corpora of the new testaments.
* add more texts to the graphical corpus interface
* grammatical searchability in the graphical corpus interface
* make free texts available
    - set up a weekly cron script (but only if there are new files)
* Implement links to parallel files in corpus header.
* Implement parallel corpus upload in web upload script
* Implement turning off the language recognition in the xsl-file (and corpus.dtd).
* Refine language recognition
* add a possibility to upload whole documents for hyphenation (and also
  analysis, generation, etc)
* add a log of every word/text uploaded/hyphenated/analyzed etc.
* Investigate the decomposed Unicode characters in file names -problem.
* Convert Min Áigi file names.
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Sjur
* read through and evaluate the public tender offers

##  Thomas
* add all word boundaries
* work on compounding and derivation
* smj G3 issue
* sme G3 issue

##  Tomi
* move aspell UTF-8 suffix bug to Bugzilla
* Document aspell infrastructure: finish doc/proof/spelling/X-spell/aspell.xml
  (it's almost done, but there are a couple of loose ends)
* new proper name lexicon
    - implement data synchronisation of proper nouns between risten.no and CVS
    - XQuery refactoring and code development for our proper noun editor
    - new version of xml2lexc (based on ccat), should handle complex names correct:
   construct entries like we have now from the different parts of a complex name
   entry
* read aligner docu, install, provide feedback
* install and test Gobby, install new version of SEE
* Set up the mechanism for the hash-mark transducer package
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla)

##  Trond
* Make nob into nor in the anchor list (A, B, C is done)
* better smj NT text, get fin NT texts
* Discuss Gobby 0.4 with Sjur
* get a key for **Maaren** in May
* install aligner, test it and give feedback
* correct hyphenation of word boundaries and exceptions with Thomas
* get/upgrade keys for **Børre's** room for **Tomi** and **Thomas**
* [fix bugs!](http://giellatekno.uit.no/bugzilla).

# 13. Next meeting, closing

08.05.2006 09:30

Closed at 13:28
