# CG workshop in nodalida 2025

Workshop at [NoDaLiDa, ](https://www.nodalida-bhlt2025.eu/).

## Programme (provisional)

## Description

This workshop on practical and theoretical aspects of CG will be co-located with
NoDaLiDa 2025 in Th√≥rshavn. The new edition of the workshop continues the
tradition of CG workshops at NoDaLiDa, which started in 2005. Apart from the
traditional field of corpus-oriented tagging and parsing, Constraint Grammar
continues to inspire applicational work, providing a robust NLP backbone in end
user-oriented systems in various areas of language technology, such as spell and
grammar checking, comma correction, ICALL, machine translation, lexicography and
others. We therefore envision workshop contributions both regarding basic
grammatical research and corpus linguistics on the one hand, and CG-based
applications on the other hand.

Constraint Grammar has always elicited a strong interest from researchers
working on less-resourced languages, such as the Sami languages, Greenlandic,
Faroese, Tibetan and the Celtic languages, for which we explicitly invite both
finished and ongoing work.

Finally, there will be room for methodological contributions on the CG formalism
itself regarding either its expressive power or improvements in compiler
implementation.

## Call for abstracts

We invite contributions concerning CG grammars for various languages or CG
systems used in tools and applications. Research reports from fields relevant to
the CG framework on the input side - such as finite-state analyzers, ontologies
etc. - are also welcome. Finally, we are hoping for methodological contributions
and experiments exploiting advances in expressive power in the most widely used
CG compiler, CG-3. As usual, we encourage short papers on ongoing work.

The workshop will be organized as a half-day workshop with both full and short
papers. Contributions will be reviewed anonymously, and the papers will be
published in the NoDaLiDa 2025 workshop proceedings.

We invite extended abstracts, approximately 1500 words (for an 8 page full
paper) or 750 words (for a 4 page short paper) - additional pages with
bibliographic references not included.

## Schedule

## Submission Formats

All submissions must follow the NoDaLiDa 2025 style files, which are available
for LaTeX (preferred) and MS Word and can be retrieved from the following
address:

Submissions must be anonymous, i.e. not reveal author(s) on the title page or
through self-references. Abstracts must be submitted digitally, in PDF, and
uploaded through the on-line conference system. Abstract submissions that
violate either of these requirements will be returned without review.

We invite extended abstracts, approximately 1500 words (for an 8 page full
paper) or 750 words (for a 4 page short paper) - additional pages with
bibliographic references not included. Finished papers may be submitted instead
of extended abstracts.

## Submission Management

Submissions to the conference must be uploaded electronically, obeying the above
requirements and no later than (end of day, world-wide):


### Organisers

* ...
