* Time: 13.00 Norw. time
* Place: on the net & phone
* Who: Børre, Sjur, Thomas, Tomi, Trond

Procedure:
* Sjur leads the meeting
* we take notes together, although I expect the ones with

Here's the **draft agenda** for the meeting:

1. Opening, checking that everyone is in, and all is working
1. Summary from the meeting in the steering committee
1. UTF-8 conversion
1. Documentation
1. Terminology database
1. Other items:
1. Closing

# 1) Opening, checking that everyone is in, and all is working
	13.08

# 2) Summary from the meeting in the steering committee
	The project, its budget and timetable have now formally been accepted
	Present were Sjur and the members of the committee: Anne Britt Hætta (sd),
	Per Edvard klemetsen (sd), Eirik Liland (uit), Bjørn Olav Megard (krd)

	Questions discussed:

*	Will we get access to Sámi placenames in F and S or not? And for what price?
	(the s.c. was reluctant to pay anything but administrative fees for the
	material)
*	Do Finland and Sweden need special versions of the spell checker tailored
	for F or S? If so, what would the extra costs be?
*	Sjur answered: We have plans for costs related to localisation and
	documentation for Swedish and Finnish versions. We have no plans for a
	differentiated content. There are differences regarding conventions for
	punctuation and hyphenation marks, for acronyms, etc. These may carry over
	to Sámi, and may require separate versions. In any case, the costs for this
	are small. Another reason for differentiating would be to include only
	domestic place-names in the F, N and S version, in order to keep the number
	of placenames, and thereby the danger of interference with Sámi words is low.

# 3) UTF-8 conversion
TODO: Trond should go through the tools check list for UTF-8 on the Compaq.
TODO: Trond asks Eckhard about vislcg and UTF-8.
TODO: Tomi to make a branch before christmas.

# 4) Documentation
	Both the internal and the external documentation should be included in
	cvs on cochise, and checked out to the giellatekno.uit.no server at Humfak.

Sjur:
```
gt/doc/index.html  <-- to build from
   --> giellatekno    <->   giellatekno.uit.no
   --> divvon         <->   divvon.org
   --> internal       <->   gt/doc/idoc/index.html

catalogues:
    gt/doc/gdoc/...
    gt/doc/ddoc/...
    gt/doc/idoc/...

Catalogues:
    cd gt/doc/
    forrest run
    localhost:8888/index.html ->

    /-----------\/--------\/--------\
|   Divvon   | GielTe | Techn. |

GielTe = giellatekno.uit.no (external disamb.proj. page)
Divvon = divvon.no (eksternal proof. proj.)
Techn. = internal docs
```

TODO: Make a stable solution for external homepages:
* url string:
* server:
* export routine from the cvs:
* forrest...:

# 5) Terminology database
*	The database interface should be finished by mid-March 2005
*	Open issues: Sámi sorting; editing facilities.
*	Tomi will implement sorting after the UTF-8 conversion is finished

# 6) Other items
*	Thomas, about Lantmäteriverket. They haven't yet encoded the saami place
	names as saami, so they are in the same category as the swedish. They will
	start with the work "soon". Should we wait or "take" all placenames,
	non-saami too, in certain area, if possible? Solution: We take rawmaterial
	with ALL swedish names as back-up until we see how long time the encoding will take.
*	(Thomas?) has been in contact with Káre Vuolab in Finland, too. She hasn't yet been in
	contact with finnish map-producers, but she's working with names for new
	maps and I understood it the way that we can get the place-names from her.
	Her project though will run for three years, so it would be good to get the
	names directly from the finnish map-producers, she will contact them in
	january. We wait till january before we decide anything further.
*	The lexicon: postponed to next meeting.
*	work during Xmas: all of us are taking Monday off, and working Tue-Fri
	Due to the short days (4 hours/8-12), any collaborative efforts will
	have to be agreed upon beforehand
*	Børre needs access to the newsgroup from Sweden:
	TODO: Trond makes that possible

# 7) Closing at 15.12.
