# Speller meeting

What is needed for a new release:
* a working installer
* working plx conversion

# Installer

**Børre** has sent the new installer to a couple of more places. One feedback received: the speller doesn't work when installed on a terminal server. Same setup as before except running off a terminal server, no error message, seems to install, but doesn't work.

With the old Divvun version on the terminal server, they get a message that the Office version is too old or too new. This did not happen before, when running directly on the PC's.

**DONE:**

**TODO:**
* test MSI package, esp. with admin install and different Win/Office combos
  (**UiT/IT, Sjur**)
* compare different sets of registry entries, to try to find differences tbat
  can explain the terminal server bug (**Børre**)

**POSTPONED:**
* find an outsourcing option (**Børre, Sjur**)
* next week: try updating NSIS ourselves (**Børre, Sjur**)
    - using Tino's documentation & old docu's from PLX
* send a request to an NSIS developer e-mail list (**Sjur**)
* try to find an NSIS script for building MSI packages (**Børre**)
* add Windows 8 support to our installer (if possible)

# PLX conversion

The latest PLX file is substantially smaller than earlier, only 6,5 Gb vs 25+ Gb earlier.
The change has happened during last week.

One ommission - that can't explain the reduced size - is that particles like *almma, bat, ges, han* have been lost in the latest spellers. — FIXED in the latest svn, but no speller yet, and thus no speller test results.

Remaining PLX bugs:

## First PRI

### Words are accepted and suggested in their compounding-form
|  cmp-form-suggestions	  |	váigas, suolo                           | 581,909,803,912

### Discovered one case of compounds without hyphen:
|  non-hyph noun+acro cmps | muoreNRK | 805

### Doesn't recognize word
|  hotealla not rec        | hotealla                                | 1358 | FIXED

This took some time to fix and **Tomi** was afraid that the change (removing +G3 and +G7 tags) would affect the speller a lot, so no other changes were made to see the effect of it. But the speller is still small :) - How small? - 6,7G 26 nov 13:34 all-plx-sme.revsorted

## First and a half PRI

### compounds
|  noun+clit not rec.      | vástidanproseantage                     | 451
|  Left cmp-tags don't work| biilarievttijođiheaddjái                | 819

## Second Last PRI

### Section for Tags-not-working
|  doesn't follow cmp-tags | sámedikkepresideanta  			                   | 489
|  +CmpN/None in comp-sugg | 1883-as, Juovla-CD-as                              | 508,717
|  +Use/SpellNoSugg        | alhpabet gets suggested: a,đ etc                   | 461

Bugs below this line can be left out of the next release if we are short on time.
----

### Compounds
|  imposs" cmps along w num.| 0-geažideapmigárvu (geažideapmigárvu is impossible) | 536,1145
|  num cmp:s on 0-          | 051-nummarat										 | 631
|  name/noun+adv cmps	   | Kuorak-ain, NRK-an									 | 642,913
|  hyphened suggestions	   | deahtta-samus +A+Attr +Noun						 | 940
|  non-ex. word accepted    | saame    											 | 658

## Last PRI
|  doesn't understand caps   | 1700-LOHKU                                         | 647

**DONE:**
* **Tomi** has solved one more PLX bug (hotealla bug)
* fix Pcle bug (**Tomi**)

**TODO:**
* investigate the reduced PLX file size (**Tomi**)
* solve the remaining PLX bugs one by one (**Tomi**)

# Release plan

* December 1:
    - PLX bugs solved
    - Alpha installer (MSI package built using NSIS)
* December 10: Beta release
* December 20: Divvun 3 release
