# Speller meeting

What is needed for a new release:
* a working installer
* working plx conversion

# Installer

There's [a separate document](WindowsInstallationTest.html) containing the test results for different combinations of MS Office and Windows  versions.

**DONE:**
* **Børre** has done further studies in the registry entry diffs.
    - looked at the Lingsoft installer registry entries
    - made a script to decode some hex encoded registry values

**TODO:**
* look at combinations of Windows XP and Office (**Børre**)
* get a proper MS certificate, to remove the warning users get when installing (**Børre**)

**POSTPONED:**
* find an outsourcing option (**Børre, Sjur**)
* next week: try updating NSIS ourselves (**Børre, Sjur**)
    - using Tino's documentation & old docu's from PLX
* send a request to an NSIS developer e-mail list (**Sjur**)
* try to find an NSIS script for building MSI packages (**Børre**)
* add Windows 8 support to our installer (if possible)

# PLX conversion

Nothing new since last meeting 14.12. Tomi has made a new speller, but the test results were identical to the previous version.

Remaining PLX bugs:

## Second PRI

WE HAVE TO TALK ABOUT THE FOLLOWING:

|   Strange PLX behaviour
| ---
| Mihkalmas-beaivi | 593

It seems that the lexical entry *Mihkalmasbeaivi* **blocks** the dynamic compound *Mihkalmas-beaivi*. This suggest a strange bug in the PLX code somewhere, but we don't know where and how - yet. Needs to be investigated.

Thomas has added some more test words to try to help find the issue with this bug. The result seems to be consistent: a lexicalised noun that is just a hyphen away from a dynamic compound, will block that dynamic compound. Thomas will add even more, and more different test words to try to confirm if this behaviour is consistent over more classes of compounds

|  REGRESSIONS
| ---
|  doesn't follow cmp-tags OR vowel-shortening | searvipresideanta > searvepresideanta sámediggepresideanta Sámediggeáirrasin | 489
|  alphabet as non-first compound part & suggested | CV-s   | 913

## Second Last PRI

Bugs from here on can be left out of the next release if we are short on time.

|  Compounds
| ---
|  num cmp:s on 0-                   | 051-nummarat                                         | 631
|  non-ex. word accepted             | saame                                                | 658

## Last PRI

 
|  Capitals
| ---
|  doesn't understand caps   | 1700-LOHKU                    | 647

 !REGRESSION
### Compounds
|  imposs" cmps along w num.         | 0-geažideapmigárvu (geažideapmigárvu is impossible) | 536,1145 | NO SUGGESTIONS - GOOD - BUT:
|  imposs" cmps sákkasteapmifierbmi>	| (225) aseákkasteapmifierbmi		ase-              | 536
|  --"--                             | (225) asiákkasteapmifierbmi		asi-
|  --"--                             | (225) ásaákkasteapmifierbmi		ása-
|  --"--                             | (225) áseákkasteapmifierbmi		áse-
|  --"--                             | (225) ásoákkasteapmifierbmi		áso-
|  --"--                             | (225) ásuákkasteapmifierbmi		ásu-
|  --"--                             | (221) ášoákkasteapmifierbmi		ášo-
|  --"--                             | (221) ášuákkasteapmifierbmi		ášu-

**DONE:**
* **Tomi** has solved even more PLX bugs

**TODO:**
* investigate the inconsistent PLX conversion bug, cf *guollibusse* (**Tomi**)
* solve the remaining PLX bugs one by one (**Tomi**)

# Release plan

The December 1 goal has passed, without meeting the targets. On the plus side is that the number of open PLX bugs have been greatly reduced, and Tomi are squashinhg PLX bugs all the time. It just takes more time than anticipated.

The installer was not easily solved by the WiX alternative - it turned out that the Greenlandic proofing tools installer has the same problems as we have.

Re-scheduling the release plan:

* New deadline December 20:
    - PLX bugs solved
    - if met, we'll release a 2.3 update using the NSIS installer, and mainly linguistic improvements for SME
* January 4: new Windows installer Alpha
* January 10: Beta release, PLX fixes for SMA and SMJ
* January 21: Divvun 3 release
